The COVID-19 pandemic has caused a worldwide health-care emergency as well as an economic calamity. Both are on a scale few have seen in their lifetime. The virus has spread broadly and rapidly, and to contain it, governments introduced public health measures that curtailed economic activity. The virus, combined with these necessary measures, has brought about the steepest and deepest economic decline since the Great 
Depression. Virtually every aspect of the Canadian and global economies has been affected, causing widespread losses in jobs and business incomes.

The course of the pandemic is inherently unknowable, and its evolution over time and across regions remains highly uncertain. New cases of the virus are now at very low levels in China, but many other emerging-market economies (EMEs) are now seeing their number of new cases increase rapidly. Some advanced economies that were hard-hit at the outset have slowed the rise in new cases and are reopening their economies. In the United States, infections have reached new highs. Globally, hundreds of thousands of lives have been lost.

In Canada, the number of new COVID-19 cases has fallen sharply from its April high, and the economic recovery has begun in all provinces and territories and across many sectors. Consequently, economic activity is picking up notably as measures to contain the virus are relaxed. This is a welcome sign.

The Bank of Canada expects a sharp rebound in economic activity in the reopening phase of the recovery, followed by a more prolonged recuperation phase, which will be uneven across regions and sectors. As a result, Canada’s economic output will likely take some time to return to its pre-COVID-19 level. Many workers and businesses can expect to face an extended period of difficulty.

The economic outlook is extremely uncertain, largely because of the unpredictable course of the virus. Reflecting this, the July Monetary Policy Report provides a central scenario for the economy rather than the usual economic projection.

The central scenario is informed by the Bank’s analysis and tries to balance the likelihood of better and worse scenarios, but it is highly conditional on our assumptions about the virus. In particular, the central scenario assumes the following.
	
Tthere will not be a broad-based second wave of the pandemic in Canada.
or globally
	
Most large-scale containment measures will be gradually lifted.
	
The pandemic will have largely run its course by mid-2022, likely because of the widespread availability of a vaccine or effective treatment.

In addition to the fundamental uncertainty about the course of the virus, there is also considerable uncertainty about its impacts. In particular, there is not enough information to estimate how deeply the economy may be scarred from business closures or massive job losses. Further, once supply is restored, it is unclear how quickly demand will recover because people may have changed their priorities, work patterns and social behaviours as a result of the pandemic.

The Bank departed from the usual structure for the Monetary Policy Report in April by not including a base-case projection. For this July Report, the Bank moves in the direction of the traditional format by providing a central scenario, but given the unusual level of uncertainty, the information provided is somewhat less precise. For example, Table 1 and Table 2 in this Report are based on the Bank’s central scenario. Less detail is provided on the breakdown of the projection for global economic growth and on the compositional contributions to the growth of Canada’s gross domestic 
product (GDP). 
	
After a historic plunge in the first half of the year, global economic activity is beginning to pick up. The increase in global demand has contributed to a partial rebound in the prices of commodities and some financial assets. The decisive actions taken by many governments and central banks have put households and businesses in a position to resume spending and production as containment measures are relaxed. But there is significant ground to make up, and regional flare-ups of the virus could impede the 
recovery.

In the Bank’s central scenario, global output rebounds in the second half of this year, although the timing and strength of the recovery vary considerably from one region to another. The effects of both ongoing physical distancing and elevated uncertainty are assumed to continue to restrain economic activity over the scenario’s time horizon. Global output falls by about 5 percent in 2020 and then grows by around 5 percent on average in 2021 and 2022. Despite this strong rebound, global output at the end of 2022 remains about 4 percent below the projected level in the January Report.

Uncertainty around this scenario is considerable. There are a multitude of scenarios both stronger and weaker than the central one presented here. Yet overall, the risks appear to be tilted to the downside, largely because of the potential for a second wave of the virus.

Measures to control the spread of COVID‑19 forced many businesses to reduce or halt their operations, resulting in unprecedented job losses. Global supply chains were disrupted, and global trade fell sharply. The containment measures affected mainly labour-intensive activity, resulting in a sharper decline in services than in manufacturing. In addition, the pandemic and containment measures were accompanied by an abrupt deterioration in business and household confidence and significant changes in behaviour. The Bank estimates that the level of global GDP in the second quarter was about 10 percent below its level in the fourth quarter of 2019.

Inflation also fell in all major economies. Prices of gasoline dropped sharply in March and April before partially rebounding in May. The plunge in energy prices reflected the rapid and large fall in global demand. Lower prices for transportation services and at hotels and restaurants also contributed to weak inflation in most regions. In contrast, food prices rose at a faster pace than usual. Overall, the inflationary pressures from supply disruptions were outweighed by the effects of the fall in demand.

China was the first major country to allow some businesses to restart their operations, with strict infection prevention and control measures in place to rein in any new outbreaks. China’s industrial production has rebounded strongly, returning to pre-lockdown levels. Demand indicators such as retail sales, however, have risen less than production as consumers remain cautious. As well, manufacturing investment is sluggish, suggesting that businesses are still uncertain about the strength of future demand, given the pandemic and ongoing trade tensions with the United States.

Economic conditions vary considerably across other EMEs. Some East Asian countries have managed to keep the number of COVID‑19 cases low and their economies mostly open. Some emerging European countries that had put lockdowns in place have recently allowed businesses to reopen. Meanwhile, many Latin American and African EMEs are still experiencing the first wave of the pandemic, at great human cost. These countries are struggling to contain the virus, which may prolong the negative economic effects and delay their recoveries. This, coupled with high levels of debt, is raising financial stability concerns in some EMEs.

In many advanced economies, activity picked up in May and June. Surveys indicated an increase in activity and confidence in the euro area. Production, employment and household spending also increased in the United States, but the resurgence in new COVID‑19 cases since the middle of June is slowing the rebound as many states are scaling back their reopening plans.

In the second half of this year, the pace of global growth rebounds strongly in the central scenario. The recovery then slows in 2021 and 2022, but growth is still relatively strong. In the central scenario, the level of economic activity reaches its pre-COVID‑19 level around the end of 2021. While the impact of the pandemic is negative for both supply and demand, the effects on demand are larger.

On the supply side, production practices in some sectors will need to adjust to include physical distancing measures. As companies evaluate the vulnerability of cross-border trade, supply chains could become shorter, more local and possibly more diversified after the pandemic. On the demand side, even when lockdown restrictions relax fully, precautionary physical distancing will likely continue to restrain household spending. In addition, elevated indebtedness and economic uncertainty are expected to cause some businesses to scale back or cancel large investment projects.

Authorities in many countries were able to quickly implement extraordinary measures to support household incomes and limit the economic damage related to the shutdown. These actions will support the recovery as activity resumes.

Governments in advanced economies and some large EMEs, such as China and Brazil, have significantly increased resources to fight the pandemic and soften its economic blow. These resources include transfers to households and businesses to replace a portion of their lost income. Many countries have also implemented loan guarantees and direct funding programs to help businesses facing liquidity shortages. Authorities in some of these countries are considering additional fiscal support. In many other EMEs, fiscal support has generally been more modest due to already elevated debt levels.

Central banks around the world have taken decisive measures to stabilize the financial system and support credit flows to businesses and households. These include measures to ease short-term funding strains and to improve liquidity. Major central banks have reduced their policy rates or eased through other measures. In the United States, the US Federal Reserve lowered the federal funds rate, significantly increased its purchase of US Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities and introduced a series of other programs to support the flow of credit. In addition, it extended its network of US-dollar swap arrangements in response to the increased stress in the offshore US dollar market.

Global financial conditions have improved substantially since the April Report, and this is helping support the recovery. Markets have reacted positively to the fiscal and monetary measures, the pickup in global demand and signs of receding negative tail risks. Since the April Report, equity prices have recovered a significant portion of their losses, credit spreads have narrowed, and volatility has declined across all markets. Financial market indicators for EMEs have also generally improved, although by less in hard-hit economies such as Brazil, South Africa and Mexico, where the pandemic is still spreading rapidly.

The US dollar has depreciated somewhat against major currencies since April, including the Canadian dollar. Safe-haven flows into assets denominated in US dollars declined, and some flows reverted to assets denominated in other currencies. The increase in commodity prices has also supported the Canadian dollar. Government bond yields in advanced economies remain close to their historical lows due to central bank asset purchases and financial market expectations that central banks will keep their policy rates low for an extended period.

Global oil prices have increased since the April Report but remain about 30 percent below pre-pandemic levels. The recent rise reflects both an increase in global oil consumption as economies reopen and reduced production. Low oil prices led members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some other non-OPEC oil producers to agree to reduce output by 9.7 million barrels per day compared with their October 2018 levels. North American producers also cut output by about 4 million barrels per day.

In its central scenario, the Bank assumes that the prices of Brent and West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil will remain close to their recent average levels, about US$40 per barrel. Risks around this assumption are tilted to the upside over the medium term because prices could continue to increase as global growth recovers and oil consumption picks up.

The price of Western Canadian Select (WCS) has also risen and was recently hovering around US$30 per barrel. The spread between the prices of WTI and WCS has narrowed to about US$10, due in part to the cuts in Canadian output. Moreover, the decline in demand was more pronounced for light oil such as WTI, which is used more in jet fuel and gasoline, than for heavy oils such as WCS.

The Bank’s non-energy commodity price index has recovered its decline from February to April. The rise in the price of base metals is consistent with the gradual recovery in industrial production and the increases in infrastructure spending in China and some advanced economies. Prices for lumber have risen, reflecting the closures of sawmills due to COVID‑19.
 
The Canadian economy is starting to recover from the tragic and devastating effects of the pandemic. The human and economic costs would be considerably worse if the containment measures had not succeeded in flattening the curve. In the second quarter, when containment measures were at their most restrictive, economic activity is estimated to have fallen about 15 percent below its level at the end of 2019. The economy appears to have hit bottom in April, with about 3 million jobs lost.

The economic contraction and subsequent recovery will look very different from those of a typical business cycle. The impact of the containment measures varied substantially across industries and types of jobs. Some jobs continued with little disruption because of the availability of online tools and the ability to work remotely. Others were hit very hard, particularly within the service sector, including jobs in travel, hospitality and personal care services. In addition, the burden has been falling disproportionately on some segments of the workforce, including lower-income earners, younger workers, recent immigrants and women.
 
The strong, well-targeted and complementary fiscal and monetary policy actions provide a solid foundation for the recovery. Still, as reopening progresses, many people will probably continue to fear contracting the virus, and uncertainty about job security is likely to persist. Both consumer and business confidence are therefore expected to remain subdued, restraining spending and employment, particularly in activities that involve in-person interaction. In addition, the pandemic has led to changes in preferences and behaviours. Some of these shifts are expected to endure, with lasting effects that could lead to structural changes in the economy over the longer term.

Despite the significant hardships that Canadians continue to face, the economy has so far avoided the most severe scenarios presented in the April Report. There are already signs that the reopening of businesses will lead to an initial strong bounce back in economic growth. However, this is expected to give way to a recuperation phase during which the pace of the recovery will moderate as the pandemic continues to affect 
confidence and the economy undergoes widespread adjustments, including in the energy sector. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation is expected to remain weak before gradually strengthening toward the 2 percent target, as the drag from low gasoline prices and other temporary effects dissipate and demand recovers, reducing economic slack.

The labour market impact of the containment measures has been severe. Between February and April, some 3 million people were suddenly out of work. In May, the unemployment rate reached a peak of 13.7 percent. An additional 1.4 million people reported that they wanted to work but did not look for a job, suggesting an adjusted unemployment rate of nearly 20 percent. Broader measures of underemployment, which include people who were employed but worked less than half their usual hours, suggest that roughly one-third of the labour force was underutilized.

The federal government quickly launched unprecedented fiscal policy actions to help households and businesses during the lockdown. Policies were introduced to replace lost income and encourage businesses to retain workers. The Canada Emergency Response Benefit (CERB) and other transfers have offset lost employment income for many workers. In addition, the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy (CEWS) has helped businesses maintain relationships with their workers and should reduce longer-term scarring effects of unemployment on the economy. Nearly one-quarter of the respondents to the Bank’s summer Business Outlook Survey reported that this subsidy had enabled them to either avoid or reduce the scale of potential layoffs.

Businesses also have access to loans through federal programs. The Canada Emergency Business Account in particular has been widely used. It provides up to $40,000 in funding to existing small businesses and will forgive up to $10,000 if the loan is repaid before the end of 2022.

In addition, federal, provincial and territorial governments have granted deferrals on more than $123 billion in taxes, fees and customs duties. While temporary, these measures have been an important source of relief for many businesses and households facing cash-flow pressures. As well, commercial lenders implemented processes for households to defer mortgage and other debt payments.

The Bank also responded swiftly to the effects of the pandemic. Starting in late February, uncertainty about how bad things could get and how long the downturn might last prompted a widespread flight to cash and made it difficult for investors to sell assets. In response to the seizing up in financial markets and the economic contraction, the Bank rapidly reduced the policy interest rate to its effective lower bound of 0.25 percent and introduced a range of liquidity facilities and asset purchase programs to help ease problems with market functioning. These programs include purchases of Canada Mortgage Bonds, bankers’ acceptances, commercial paper, corporate bonds and provincial and federal government debt.

Financial markets are now functioning considerably better and, consequently, the use of some facilities has declined. The Bank’s large-scale asset purchases of Government of Canada bonds initially improved liquidity and confidence. Now, with market functioning improved and the economy reopening, these purchases are providing considerable monetary stimulus. The lowering of the policy interest rate to its effective lower bound, the bond purchases and the easing of global financial conditions have all contributed to lower domestic interest rates and made it easier for households and businesses to borrow. For example, the lower yields on five-year Government of Canada bonds are being reflected in cheaper fixed-rate mortgages. These actions have reduced debt-service costs and will contribute to spending that should support the recovery. 

GDP is estimated to have contracted sharply in the second quarter. Timely high-frequency data suggest that the economic fallout was at its worst in April. In May and June, as the number of new COVID‑19 cases stabilized and began to decrease, governments started easing the containment restrictions. Labour market indicators suggest that economic 
activity began expanding in May and accelerated in June. About 1 1/4 million 
jobs were added in these two months, with broad-based, but uneven, increases across sectors.

The effects of containment measures differ across businesses, and public health protocols vary across provinces, territories and municipalities. Together, these mean that the process of reopening will be gradual and uneven. Some activities, including motor vehicle sales, have already seen a strong pickup since April. Likewise, housing activity fell sharply during the lockdown but is beginning to recover quickly. In contrast, some of the hardest-hit businesses, such as restaurants, travel and personal care services, have only just started to see improvements in recent weeks and are expected to continue to face significant challenges.
 
These developments are consistent with measures of consumer and business confidence, which have improved but remain subdued. Despite the programs that have been introduced, some households and businesses are suffering severe financial hardship.

In the central scenario, about 40 percent of the drop in output in the first half of 2020 is reversed in the third quarter. This reflects the lifting of most containment measures and some associated improvement in confidence. The strength of growth in the third quarter is largely driven by the initial boost from the reopening of businesses and the resulting partial rebound in spending. The pace of growth is therefore unlikely to persist. Overall, the economy has thus far avoided the most severe scenarios presented in the April Report, but considerable economic slack remains.

Demand for some goods and services has fallen sharply because of the pandemic and related containment measures, triggering sharp declines in prices for gasoline, travel services, and clothing and footwear. In the calculation of inflation, these price declines have heavily outweighed the increase in prices for products that saw a surge in demand, such as household cleaning supplies and non-perishable food, or that suffered from supply disruptions, such as meat.

The direct and indirect effects of the crisis have been pulling down CPI inflation. As anticipated in the April Report, CPI inflation fell close to zero in April and May. The Bank’s measures of core inflation have also declined, although by far less because they tend to filter out more volatile price movements such as those for gasoline. Core inflation measures ranged from 1.4 to 1.9 percent.
 
The consumption patterns of Canadians have changed dramatically since the start of the pandemic. CPI inflation is calculated using fixed pre-pandemic consumption weights and thus may not accurately capture the inflation rate households are currently facing. Box 2 outlines a new adjusted price index that captures the effects of the change in consumption patterns. The new price index is based on recent monthly transaction and survey data. It also shows a sizable decline in inflation, albeit one that is slightly 
smaller than in the official CPI.

Firms have been heavily discounting some products to clear out undesired inventories that built up at the height of the pandemic. At the same time, there is only limited evidence to date of firms marking up their prices to cover the increased costs of doing business during the pandemic. Despite these additional costs, respondents to the summer Business Outlook Survey stated that they intend to raise prices less than last year and operate with smaller margins to remain competitive. Combined with low energy prices, these forces are expected to keep inflation weak in the near term.

After the initial bounce back in GDP growth, the economy is expected to enter a more protracted and gradual recovery. This reflects persistent effects of ongoing physical distancing measures, a slow rebound in foreign demand and subdued confidence on the part of households and firms resulting from elevated uncertainty about both the pandemic and the pace of the recovery.

Ongoing restructuring is an additional factor that restrains activity during recuperation. Some businesses will not reopen, others will go bankrupt, and new firms will require more time to form and scale. The service sector is usually more resilient in recessions, providing a buffering role for the economy. This time, however, the sector was also hit hard during containment and will face ongoing challenges adjusting to a world where physical distancing remains necessary.
 
In the central scenario, fiscal and monetary policies together provide substantial support to the Canadian economy. Fiscal measures are scaled to the impacts of the pandemic and respond to evolving economic conditions. Since the April Report, the CERB and CEWS have both been extended. Moreover, other programs have been introduced or expanded, including commercial rent assistance and additional supports for students and new graduates, seniors, essential workers, and the oil and gas sector. Monetary stimulus has reduced borrowing costs for both households and businesses.

Several forces contribute to closing the gap between supply and demand over time in the central scenario. Supply initially recovers in line with the easing of containment measures. Demand benefits only gradually from improvements in foreign demand and confidence as well as support from fiscal and monetary policies, but eventually foreign and domestic demand increase faster than supply, absorbing excess capacity.

In the central scenario, household spending picks up gradually as containment measures are eventually lifted and confidence in the economy improves. However, caution persists. Thus, while the savings rate declines from its peak in the second quarter, it remains higher than in recent years.

Underlying the central scenario, the consumption patterns of households differ greatly depending on households’ individual financial situations and the impact of the pandemic on their incomes.6 Lower-income workers have been disproportionately affected by the efforts to contain the spread of the virus, either through layoffs or reduced hours. Many have seen their lost incomes replaced by CERB payments or other income-support measures and have benefited temporarily from deferred debt payments. Nonetheless, some of these households will face prolonged income losses, which could push up the number of financially stressed households, restraining the recovery of consumption.

At the same time, the incomes of other households have held up through this period. They are more likely to include people who earn higher incomes and who work in professions with few barriers to remote work. These households have been accumulating savings, mainly because there has been less to spend money on during the containment period. This suggests pent-up demand could help boost spending of some consumers.

Overall, the central scenario for consumption incorporates a degree of caution, as some households prioritize paying down debts or increasing precautionary savings given the uncertain economic environment. Insolvencies increase but do not derail the recovery.

More broadly, household spending patterns have shifted since the onset of the pandemic, and some of these changes may last (Chart 15). As a result, there is heightened uncertainty regarding the composition of consumption and housing demand in the central scenario and what that might imply for the retail and travel sectors as well as for residential construction.

In the central scenario, the effects of the downturn and lower immigration hold down housing activity over the next few years. After a near-term boost from pent-up demand, residential investment slowly increases as income and confidence recover.

In the Bank’s central scenario, uncertainty about the composition and strength of future demand, elevated debt levels and lingering financial stress significantly dampen business investment. Across all regions and sectors, respondents to the summer Business Outlook Survey reported that uncertainty is weighing heavily on investment plans and suggested that their investment will remain weak over the next 12 months.

Business investment recovers slowly in the central scenario, even as elevated uncertainty recedes. This reflects that capacity pressures are quite limited overall and that some firms are scaling back or abandoning their investment plans, while other businesses are closing their doors permanently. In addition, it will take some time for businesses to reposition themselves and adjust their investment to reflect new demand patterns.

A lower investment path is also likely to have persistent effects on potential output by reducing the future capital stock. One area of relative strength, however, is investment in digital technology. The pandemic has already accelerated digitalization in some sectors. In the Business Outlook Survey, retailers often cited plans to further invest in online offerings, and providers of financial and other professional services reported spending more on digital technology so that staff can work from home efficiently.

The current environment of low energy prices arrived just as the sector was beginning to emerge from a lengthy period of challenging adjustments. 

Acute liquidity concerns have eased as oil prices have increased from their April lows and the spread between the prices of WTI and WCS has narrowed. Nevertheless, the sector remains under pressure, with smaller firms facing greater challenges than the larger, more-integrated producers.

Restructuring within the industry, ongoing since the 2014–15 oil price shock, is expected to continue. Oil production has been reduced and capital expenditure plans have been significantly curtailed. In addition, there are renewed questions about the likelihood of pipelines being developed. The central scenario anticipates that, with weaker investment in the face of reduced demand and low prices, oil production is now on a considerably lower path than before the COVID‑19 crisis.

Exports in the central scenario recover gradually as borders reopen further, international supply chains are re-established and foreign demand picks up. However, travel and exports of motor vehicles and energy continue to weigh on growth, given weaker demand for these products during the recuperation phase.

The current crisis could amplify pressures to relocate supply chains domestically, a global trend that started before the pandemic due to rising protectionism. In addition, in the current environment of disrupted trade, some of the declines in exports may be offset by substitution away from some imports and toward domestic goods and services.

In the central scenario, the path for CPI inflation over the next year largely reflects the influence of energy prices. The dramatic decline in these prices in March and April will hold inflation down until early 2021. After that, the inflation outlook depends primarily on the speed and strength at which demand and supply recover. Firms report that capacity could return quickly as the economy reopens and containment measures are lifted. They expect the recovery in demand to be more muted, especially in the services and energy sectors. The scenario assumes that the impact on supply is about 60 percent of the decline in GDP over the first half of 2020.
 
Even as establishments reopen, many consumers are expected to be hesitant to resume their previous spending patterns, partly due to fears of contracting the virus. In addition, even those who did not lose their job, or those whose lost income was fully offset by government programs, may re-evaluate their need for precautionary savings. Foreign demand may be even slower to rebound because some trade partners are taking longer than Canada to contain the spread of the virus. Faced with uncertainty about 
demand, businesses are likely to cancel or postpone investment plans. Overall, this implies that demand will take some time to recover in line with supply.

In this context, weak demand explains why firms are reluctant to pass along cost increases associated with the pandemic. However, it is possible that customers will be sympathetic when price increases are clearly linked to these costs. This could lead to higher inflation than in the central scenario.

So far, consumer expectations of inflation over the next one to two years have remained firm despite the large decline in CPI inflation. In the central scenario, downward pressure on inflation gradually fades as demand recovers and economic slack diminishes. However, uncertainty is far greater than usual. The large declines in both demand and supply are extraordinary. Over a longer horizon, the pandemic could cause large and lasting changes in consumer preferences and other sources of demand. Similarly, the scope of possible structural changes to a post-pandemic economy is vast, and the timing of adjustments will remain unknowable as long as COVID‑19 continues to be a threat.
 
The Bank of Canada responded quickly and forcefully to market disruptions as well as to the anticipated economic consequences of the COVID‑19 pandemic and related containment measures. The Bank reduced the policy interest rate by 150 basis points to 25 basis points, its effective lower bound, and launched a number of liquidity facilities and asset purchase programs. The cumulative impact of these facilities and purchase programs since March has resulted in an exceptional increase in the size of the Bank’s balance sheet.

While the initial intent of the facilities and programs was to restore market functioning, the programs all play a role in the conduct of monetary policy. This is because, when markets are not functioning properly, the chain of lending and borrowing stops working, and the ability of monetary policy to provide stimulus breaks down. During a crisis, central banks must ensure that credit can continue to flow to households and businesses. Although the Bank has reduced the frequency of its short-term liquidity operations since the improvement in market functioning, the facilities are still in place as an important backstop while uncertainty remains elevated.

Large-scale secondary market purchases of Government of Canada bonds provide monetary stimulus through several channels and can be described as quantitative easing (QE). When markets are not functioning well, QE improves liquidity in the government bond market (liquidity channel). QE can also lower borrowing costs for businesses and households by putting downward pressure on government yields (interest-rate channel). Through the purchase of a large quantity of government bonds held by the private sector, QE reduces the relative supply of bonds and thus lowers their relative yields, leading investors to reallocate their portfolio to riskier assets (portfolio balance channel). In addition, some investors will adjust their portfolios to include more assets priced in other currencies, placing downward pressure on the Canadian dollar (foreign exchange channel). Markets generally interpret QE as a signal that rates will likely be at the lower bound for an extended period (signalling channel).

The Bank has committed to continue buying at least $5 billion of Canadian government bonds each week until the recovery is well underway. The current level of purchases is likely working to varying degrees through all these channels, which helps make borrowing more accessible and more affordable for households and businesses. Initially, the purchases were improving liquidity. With improved market functioning and the reopening of the economy, other channels are becoming more important. While the Bank’s balance sheet is not large compared with those of other major central banks, the increase in its size has been particularly rapid.

The Bank’s corporate bond purchase program, through purchases of corporate bonds in secondary markets, has helped improve liquidity conditions in this market, even though purchases have been limited to date. As market functioning improved globally and in Canada, Canadian corporations became better able to access markets directly for new borrowing that will support continued operations. Credit easing programs like this one can deliver stimulus by narrowing the difference between yields of corporate and government bonds, bringing down borrowing costs for businesses.

The central scenario for output and inflation described in this Report is highly conditional on the course of the pandemic, and there are many scenarios above and below this one in which the evolution of the pandemic is more or less favourable. There are also a number of economic upside and downside risks even if the virus evolves as assumed in the central scenario. In practice, public health and economic health are closely intertwined, with many of the economic risks likely to break to the upside (downside) if the virus evolves more (less) favourably than in the central scenario.

On the downside, there are a series of increasingly dire scenarios in which COVID-19 outbreaks increase as the economy reopens, forcing the reintroduction of containment measures. The broader the shutdowns, the bigger the economic impact. This includes the possibility of a widespread and possibly more severe second wave of the virus, requiring a complete lockdown.

Tighter global financial conditions could result if, for instance, there were widespread household, corporate and sovereign defaults given elevated debt levels. Such an outcome would threaten financial stability and likely cause a rapid adjustment of market prices and risk premiums. Emerging markets, particularly those that have not yet contained the virus, would be especially vulnerable and could face greater stress and a marked increase in capital outflows. If the pandemic takes a more dire path, trade tensions could be exacerbated, and global fragmentation could worsen. In Canada, a much weaker scenario could crystalize the risks associated with high household indebtedness.

On the upside, a stronger economic scenario could unfold if, for instance, economies reopen with minimal spread of the virus, or if a vaccine or effective treatment is available earlier than assumed in the central scenario. Such an improved scenario could lead to and in turn be bolstered by higher commodity prices and greater business and consumer confidence. These factors would likely lead to a stronger profile in exports and business investment, most notably in the energy and commodity sectors. If consumer 
confidence were more robust and enduring, a stronger rebound in household spending than the subdued recovery in the central scenario would be anticipated. A more positive outlook could prompt households that built up savings during the containment period to pick up the spending they had put on hold, releasing pent-up demand.

Even if the course of the pandemic is as assumed in the central scenario, the economic factors mentioned above could lead to stronger or weaker outcomes for the economic outlook, with dynamics similar to what is discussed here.
