Ottawa, Ontario
May 25, 2016
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1/2 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 3/4 per cent and
the deposit rate is 1/4 per cent.
The global economy is evolving largely as the Bank projected in its April Monetary
Policy Report (MPR). In the United States, despite weakness in the first quarter, a
number of indicators, including employment, point to a return to solid growth in
2016. Financial conditions remain accommodative, with ongoing geopolitical
factors contributing to fragile market sentiment. Oil prices are higher, in part
because of short-term supply disruptions.
In Canada, the economy’s structural adjustment to the oil price shock continues,
but is proving to be uneven. Growth in the first quarter of 2016 appears to be in
line with the Bank’s April projection, although business investment and intentions
remain disappointing. The second quarter will be much weaker than predicted
because of the devastating Alberta wildfires. The Bank’s preliminary assessment is
that fire-related destruction and the associated halt to oil production will cut
about 1 1/4 percentage points off real GDP growth in the second quarter. The
economy is expected to rebound in the third quarter, as oil production resumes
and reconstruction begins. While the Canadian dollar has been fluctuating in
response to shifting expectations of US monetary policy and higher oil prices, it is
now close to the level assumed in April.
Inflation is roughly in line with the Bank’s expectations. Total CPI inflation has
risen recently, largely due to movements in gasoline prices, but remains slightly
below the 2 per cent target. Measures of core inflation remain close to 2 per cent,
reflecting the offsetting influences of past exchange rate depreciation and excess
capacity.
3/25/24, 2:10 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1/2 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2016/05/fad-press-release-2016-05-25/
2/2
Canada’s housing market continues to display strong regional divergences,
reinforced by the complex adjustment underway in the economy. In this context,
household vulnerabilities have moved higher. Meanwhile, the risks to the Bank’s
inflation projection remain roughly balanced. Therefore, the Bank’s Governing
Council judges that the current stance of monetary policy is still appropriate, and
the target for the overnight rate remains at 1/2 per cent.
