Ottawa, Ontario
March 4, 2020
The Bank of Canada today lowered its target for the overnight rate by 50 basis
points to 1 ¼ percent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 ½ percent and the
deposit rate is 1 percent.
While Canada’s economy has been operating close to potential with inflation on
target, the COVID-19 virus is a material negative shock to the Canadian and global
outlooks, and monetary and fiscal authorities are responding.
Before the outbreak, the global economy was showing signs of stabilizing, as the
Bank had projected in its January Monetary Policy Report (MPR). However, COVID-
19 represents a significant health threat to people in a growing number of
countries. In consequence, business activity in some regions has fallen sharply
and supply chains have been disrupted. This has pulled down commodity prices
and the Canadian dollar has depreciated. Global markets are reacting to the
spread of the virus by repricing risk across a broad set of assets, making financial
conditions less accommodative. It is likely that as the virus spreads, business and
consumer confidence will deteriorate, further depressing activity.
In Canada, GDP growth slowed to 0.3 percent during the fourth quarter of 2019, in
line with the Bank’s forecast, although its composition was different. Consumption
was stronger than expected, supported by healthy labour income growth.
Residential investment continued to grow, albeit at a more moderate pace than
earlier in the year. Meanwhile, both business investment and exports weakened.
It is becoming clear that the first quarter of 2020 will be weaker than the Bank had
expected. The drop in Canada’s terms of trade, if sustained, will weigh on income
growth. Meanwhile, business investment does not appear to be recovering as was
expected following positive trade policy developments. In addition, rail line
blockades, strikes by Ontario teachers, and winter storms in some regions are
dampening economic activity in the first quarter.
CPI inflation in January was stronger than expected, due to temporary factors.
Core measures of inflation all remain around 2 percent, consistent with an
economy that has been operating close to potential.
3/25/24, 1:31 PM
Bank of Canada lowers overnight rate target to 1 ¼ percent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2020/03/fad-press-release-2020-03-04/
2/2
In light of all these developments, the outlook is clearly weaker now than it was in
January. As the situation evolves, Governing Council stands ready to adjust
monetary policy further if required to support economic growth and keep
inflation on target. While markets continue to function well, the Bank will continue
to ensure that the Canadian financial system has sufficient liquidity.
The Bank continues to closely monitor economic and financial conditions, in
coordination with other G7 central banks and fiscal authorities.
