Ottawa, Ontario
July 17, 2012
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent and
the deposit rate is 3/4 per cent.
Global growth prospects have weakened since the Bank’s April Monetary Policy
Report (MPR). While the economic expansion in the United States continues at a
gradual but somewhat slower pace, developments in Europe point to a renewed
contraction. In China and other emerging economies, the deceleration in growth
has been greater than anticipated, reflecting past policy tightening and weaker
external demand.  This slowdown in global activity has led to a sizeable reduction
in commodity prices, although they remain elevated. The combination of
increasing global excess capacity over the projection horizon and reduced
commodity prices is expected to moderate global inflationary pressures. Global
financial conditions have also deteriorated since April, with periods of
considerable volatility. The Bank’s base case projection assumes that the
European crisis will continue to be contained, although this assumption is subject
to downside risks.
While global headwinds are restraining Canadian economic activity, domestic
factors are expected to support moderate growth in Canada. The Bank expects
the economy to grow at a pace roughly in line with its production potential in the
near term, before picking up through 2013. Consumption and business
investment are expected to be the primary drivers of growth, reflecting very
stimulative domestic financial conditions.  However, their pace will be influenced
by external headwinds, notably the effects of lower commodity prices on
Canadian incomes and wealth, as well as by record-high household debt. Housing
activity is expected to slow from record levels. Government spending is not
projected to contribute to growth in 2012 and to contribute only modestly
thereafter, in line with plans to consolidate spending by federal and provincial
governments. Canadian exports are projected to remain below their pre-recession
peak until the beginning of 2014, reflecting the dynamics of foreign demand and
ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the
Canadian dollar.
3/25/24, 2:30 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2012/07/fad-press-release-2012-07-17/
2/2
The Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.1 per cent in 2012, 2.3 per cent
in 2013 and 2.5 per cent in 2014. The economy is expected to reach full capacity in
the second half of 2013, thus operating with a small amount of slack for
somewhat longer than previously anticipated.
Core inflation is forecast to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon
as the economy operates near its production potential, growth in labour
compensation stays moderate and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
Given the recent drop in gasoline prices and with futures prices suggesting
persistently lower oil prices, the Bank expects total CPI inflation to remain
noticeably below the 2 per cent target over the coming year before returning to
target around mid-2013.
Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank has decided to maintain the target for the
overnight rate at 1 per cent. To the extent that the economic expansion continues
and the current excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, some
modest withdrawal of the present considerable monetary policy stimulus may
become appropriate, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over
the medium term. The timing and degree of any such withdrawal will be weighed
carefully against domestic and global economic developments.
