Ottawa, Ontario
July 20, 2010
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is raising its target for the overnight
rate by one-quarter of one percentage point to 3/4 per cent. The Bank Rate is
correspondingly 1 per cent and the deposit rate is 1/2 per cent.
The global economic recovery is proceeding but is not yet self-sustaining. Greater
emphasis on balance sheet repair by households, banks, and governments in a
number of advanced economies is expected to temper the pace of global growth
relative to the Bank's outlook in its April Monetary Policy Report (MPR). While the
policy response to the European sovereign debt crisis has reduced the risk of an
adverse outcome and increased the prospect of sustainable long term growth, it
is expected to slow the global recovery over the projection horizon. In the United
States, private demand is picking up but remains uneven.
Economic activity in Canada is unfolding largely as expected, led by government
and consumer spending. Housing activity is declining markedly from high levels,
consistent with the Bank's view that policy stimulus resulted in household
expenditures being brought forward into late 2009 and early 2010. While
employment growth has resumed, business investment appears to be held back
by global uncertainties and has yet to recover from its sharp contraction during
the recession.
The Bank expects the economic recovery in Canada to be more gradual than it
had projected in its April MPR, with growth of 3.5 per cent in 2010, 2.9 per cent in
2011, and 2.2 per cent in 2012. This revision reflects a slightly weaker profile for
global economic growth and more modest consumption growth in Canada. The
Bank anticipates that business investment and net exports will make a relatively
larger contribution to growth.
Inflation in Canada has been broadly in line with the Bank's April projection. While
the Bank now expects the economy to return to full capacity at the end of 2011,
two quarters later than had been anticipated in April, the underlying dynamics for
inflation are little changed. Both total CPI and core inflation are expected to
remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period. The Bank will look
through the transitory effects on inflation of changes to provincial indirect taxes.
3/25/24, 3:22 PM
Bank of Canada increases overnight rate target to 3/4 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2010/07/fad-press-release-2010-07-20/
2/2
Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank has decided to raise the target for the
overnight rate to 3/4 per cent. This decision leaves considerable monetary
stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in light
of the significant excess supply in Canada, the strength of domestic spending, and
the uneven global recovery.
Given the considerable uncertainty surrounding the outlook, any further
reduction of monetary stimulus would have to be weighed carefully against
domestic and global economic developments.
