Ottawa, Ontario
June 1, 2022
The Bank of Canada today increased its target for the overnight rate to 1½%, with
the Bank Rate at 1¾% and the deposit rate at 1½%. The Bank is also continuing its
policy of quantitative tightening (QT).
Inflation globally and in Canada continues to rise, largely driven by higher prices
for energy and food. In Canada, CPI inflation reached 6.8% for the month of April –
well above the Bank’s forecast – and will likely move even higher in the near term
before beginning to ease. As pervasive input price pressures feed through into
consumer prices, inflation continues to broaden, with core measures of inflation
ranging between 3.2% and 5.1%. Almost 70% of CPI categories now show inflation
above 3%. The risk of elevated inflation becoming entrenched has risen. The Bank
will use its monetary policy tools to return inflation to target and keep inflation
expectations well anchored.
The increase in global inflation is occurring as the global economy slows. The
Russian invasion of Ukraine, China’s COVID-related lockdowns, and ongoing
supply disruptions are all weighing on activity and boosting inflation. The war has
increased uncertainty and is putting further upward pressure on prices for energy
and agricultural commodities. This is dampening the outlook, particularly in
Europe. In the United States, private domestic demand remains robust, despite
the economy contracting in the first quarter of 2022. US labour market strength
continues, with wage pressures intensifying. Global financial conditions have
tightened and markets have been volatile.
Canadian economic activity is strong and the economy is clearly operating in
excess demand. National accounts data for the first quarter of 2022 showed GDP
growth of 3.1 percent, in line with the Bank’s April Monetary Policy Report (MPR)
projection. Job vacancies are elevated, companies are reporting widespread
labour shortages, and wage growth has been picking up and broadening across
sectors. Housing market activity is moderating from exceptionally high levels. With
consumer spending in Canada remaining robust and exports anticipated to
strengthen, growth in the second quarter is expected to be solid.
3/25/24, 1:16 PM
Bank of Canada increases policy interest rate by 50 basis points, continues quantitative tightening - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2022/06/fad-press-release-2022-06-01/
2/2
With the economy in excess demand, and inflation persisting well above target
and expected to move higher in the near term, the Governing Council continues
to judge that interest rates will need to rise further. The policy interest rate
remains the Bank’s primary monetary policy instrument, with quantitative
tightening acting as a complementary tool. The pace of further increases in the
policy rate will be guided by the Bank’s ongoing assessment of the economy and
inflation, and the Governing Council is prepared to act more forcefully if needed
to meet its commitment to achieve the 2% inflation target.
