Ottawa, Ontario
March 4, 2015
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 3/4 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 per cent and
the deposit rate is 1/2 per cent.
Total CPI inflation in Canada has fallen as expected, reflecting the significant drop
in oil prices. Core inflation remains close to 2 per cent and continues to be
temporarily boosted by the pass-through effects of the lower Canadian dollar, as
well as sector-specific factors.
The global economy is evolving broadly in line with projections in the Bank’s
January Monetary Policy Report (MPR). The United States remains the main source
of momentum in the global economy, while headwinds to growth linger in many
regions. In this context, a growing number of central banks have taken actions to
ease monetary conditions. Crude oil prices are close to the Bank’s MPR
assumptions.
Canadian economic growth in the fourth quarter of 2014 was consistent with the
Bank’s expectations. The oil price shock had a modest early impact on aggregate
demand, and a larger effect on income. The Bank continues to expect that most of
the negative impact from lower oil prices will appear in the first half of 2015,
although it may be even more front-loaded than projected in January.
Nevertheless, data for 2014 as a whole suggest the anticipated rotation into
stronger growth in non-energy exports and investment is well underway.
Financial conditions in Canada have eased materially since January, in response to
the Bank’s recent monetary policy action and to global financial developments.
This easing is reflected across the yield curve and in a wide range of asset prices,
including the Canadian dollar. These conditions will mitigate the negative effects
of the oil price shock, further boosting growth through stronger non-energy
exports and investment.
3/25/24, 2:17 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 3/4 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2015/03/fad-press-release-2015-03-04/
2/2
In light of these developments, the risks around the inflation profile are now more
balanced and financial stability risks are evolving as expected in January. At
present, we judge that the current degree of monetary policy stimulus is still
appropriate and the target for the overnight rate remains at 3/4 per cent.
