Ottawa, Ontario
September 7, 2005
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is raising its target for the overnight
rate by one-quarter of one percentage point to 2 3/4 per cent. The operating band
for the overnight rate is correspondingly increased, and the Bank Rate is now 3
per cent.
Information received since the July Monetary Policy Report Update (MPRU) indicates
that the global and Canadian economies have generally evolved in line with the
Bank's expectations, but world energy prices have moved above levels assumed
at that time. Core and total CPI inflation in July were slightly below expectations,
and the pace of growth and level of activity in the Canadian economy in the
second quarter were somewhat higher than had been expected. With the
economy operating close to full capacity, and consistent with the Bank's analysis
in the MPRU, today's interest rate increase will help to promote a balance between
aggregate demand and supply in the economy and keep inflation on target over
the medium term.
Hurricane Katrina has taken a tragic human toll in the U.S. gulf states. The Bank's
preliminary assessment is that the hurricane's disruption to the U.S. economy is
likely to translate into somewhat lower output growth in the United States over
the balance of 2005 and somewhat higher growth in 2006. The overall impact on
Canadian economic activity will probably be modest, although there will be a
temporary spike in consumer prices, reflecting higher prices for gasoline and
heating fuels.
Despite developments associated with higher energy prices, risks to the Bank's
outlook for the Canadian economy through 2006 still appear to be reasonably
balanced. Over the medium term, however, there is increasing risk that the
correction of global current account imbalances could involve a period of
weakness in world aggregate demand.
With the Canadian economy operating close to capacity and the stance of
monetary policy still stimulative, the Bank will be monitoring developments
closely and continuing to assess underlying trends in the economy and their
implications for keeping inflation on target over the medium term.
3/25/24, 3:36 PM
Bank of Canada raises overnight rate target by 1/4 percentage point to 2 3/4 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2005/09/bank-canada-raises-overnight-rate-target-5/
2/2
