Ottawa, Ontario
March 6, 2024
The Bank of Canada today held its target for the overnight rate at 5%, with the
Bank Rate at 5¼% and the deposit rate at 5%. The Bank is continuing its policy of
quantitative tightening.
Global economic growth slowed in the fourth quarter. US GDP growth also slowed
but remained surprisingly robust and broad-based, with solid contributions from
consumption and exports. Euro area economic growth was flat at the end of the
year after contracting in the third quarter. Inflation in the United States and the
euro area continued to ease. Bond yields have increased since January while
corporate credit spreads have narrowed. Equity markets have risen sharply.
Global oil prices are slightly higher than what was assumed in the January
Monetary Policy Report (MPR).
In Canada, the economy grew in the fourth quarter by more than expected,
although the pace remained weak and below potential. Real GDP expanded by 1%
after contracting 0.5% in the third quarter. Consumption was up a modest 1%,
and final domestic demand contracted with a large decline in business
investment. A strong increase in exports boosted growth. Employment continues
to grow more slowly than the population, and there are now some signs that
wage pressures may be easing. Overall, the data point to an economy in modest
excess supply.
CPI inflation eased to 2.9% in January, as goods price inflation moderated further.
Shelter price inflation remains elevated and is the biggest contributor to inflation.
Underlying inflationary pressures persist: year-over-year and three-month
measures of core inflation are in the 3% to 3.5% range, and the share of CPI
components growing above 3% declined but is still above the historical average.
The Bank continues to expect inflation to remain close to 3% during the first half
of this year before gradually easing.
3/23/24, 11:46 PM
Bank of Canada maintains policy rate, continues quantitative tightening - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2024/03/fad-press-release-2024-03-06/
2/2
Governing Council decided to hold the policy rate at 5% and to continue to
normalize the Bank’s balance sheet. The Council is still concerned about risks to
the outlook for inflation, particularly the persistence in underlying inflation.
Governing Council wants to see further and sustained easing in core inflation and
continues to focus on the balance between demand and supply in the economy,
inflation expectations, wage growth, and corporate pricing behaviour. The Bank
remains resolute in its commitment to restoring price stability for Canadians.
