Ottawa, Ontario
April 20, 2010
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1/4 per cent. The Bank Rate is unchanged at 1/2 per cent and the
deposit rate is 1/4 per cent.
Global economic growth has been somewhat stronger than projected, with
momentum in emerging-market economies increasing noticeably. Exceptional
stimulus from monetary and fiscal policies continues to provide important
support in many countries. The recovery in the major advanced economies is still
expected to be relatively subdued, reflecting ongoing balance sheet adjustments
and the gradual withdrawal of fiscal stimulus commencing later this year. Despite
recent progress, considerable uncertainty remains about the durability of the
global recovery.
In Canada, the economic recovery is proceeding somewhat more rapidly than the
Bank had projected in its January Monetary Policy Report (MPR). The profile for
growth is more front-loaded than that presented in the January MPR. The Bank
now projects that the economy will grow by 3.7 per cent in 2010 before slowing to
3.1 per cent in 2011 and 1.9 per cent in 2012.
This profile reflects stronger near-term global growth, very strong housing activity
in Canada, and the Bank’s assessment that policy stimulus resulted in more
expenditures being brought forward in late 2009 and early 2010 than expected. At
the same time, the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, Canada’s poor
relative productivity performance, and the low absolute level of U.S. demand will
continue to act as significant drags on economic activity in Canada. The Bank
expects the economy to return to full capacity in the second quarter of 2011.
3/25/24, 3:22 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1/4 per cent; removes conditional commitment - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2010/04/fad-press-release-2010-04-20/
2/2
The outlook for inflation reflects the combined influences of stronger domestic
demand, slowing wage growth, and overall excess supply. Core inflation, which
has been somewhat firmer than projected in January, is expected to ease slightly
in the second quarter of 2010 as the effect of temporary factors dissipates, and to
remain near 2 per cent throughout the rest of the projection period. Total CPI
inflation is expected to be slightly higher than 2 per cent over the coming year,
before returning to the target in the second half of 2011.
In response to the sharp, synchronous global recession, the Bank lowered its
target rate rapidly over the course of 2008 and early 2009 to its lowest possible
level. With its conditional commitment introduced in April 2009, the Bank also
provided exceptional guidance on the likely path of its target rate. This
unconventional policy provided considerable additional stimulus during a period
of very weak economic conditions and major downside risks to the global and
Canadian economies. With recent improvements in the economic outlook, the
need for such extraordinary policy is now passing, and it is appropriate to begin to
lessen the degree of monetary stimulus. The extent and timing will depend on the
outlook for economic activity and inflation, and will be consistent with achieving
the 2 per cent inflation target.
In accordance with the removal of the conditional commitment, there will be no
additional term Purchase and Resale Agreements issued by the Bank.
