Ottawa, Ontario
March 6, 2019
The Bank of Canada today maintained its target for the overnight rate at 1 ¾ per
cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 2 per cent and the deposit rate is 1 ½ per
cent.
Recent data suggest that the slowdown in the global economy has been more
pronounced and widespread than the Bank had forecast in its January Monetary
Policy Report (MPR). While the sources of moderation appear to be multiple, trade
tensions and uncertainty are weighing heavily on confidence and economic
activity. It is difficult to disentangle these confidence effects from other adverse
factors, but it is clear that global economic prospects would be buoyed by the
resolution of trade conflicts. 
Many central banks have acknowledged the building headwinds to growth, and
financial conditions have eased as a result. Meanwhile, progress in US-China trade
talks and policy stimulus in China have improved market sentiment and
contributed to firmer commodity prices.
For Canada, the Bank was projecting a temporary slowdown in late 2018 and early
2019, mainly because of last year’s drop in oil prices. The Bank had forecast weak
exports and investment in the energy sector and a decline in household spending
in oil-producing provinces. However, the slowdown in the fourth quarter was
sharper and more broadly based. Consumer spending and the housing market
were soft, despite strong growth in employment and labour income. Both exports
and business investment also fell short of expectations. After growing at a pace of
1.8 per cent in 2018, it now appears that the economy will be weaker in the first
half of 2019 than the Bank projected in January.
Core inflation measures remain close to 2 per cent. CPI inflation eased to 1.4 per
cent in January, largely because of lower gasoline prices. The Bank expects CPI
inflation to be slightly below the 2 per cent target through most of 2019, reflecting
the impact of temporary factors, including the drag from lower energy prices and
a wider output gap.
3/25/24, 1:33 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1 ¾ per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2019/03/fad-press-release-2019-03-06/
2/2
Governing Council judges that the outlook continues to warrant a policy interest
rate that is below its neutral range. Given the mixed picture that the data present,
it will take time to gauge the persistence of below-potential growth and the
implications for the inflation outlook. With increased uncertainty about the timing
of future rate increases, Governing Council will be watching closely developments
in household spending, oil markets, and global trade policy.
