Ottawa, Ontario
March 4, 2008
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is lowering its target for the
overnight rate by one-half of one percentage point to 3 1/2 per cent. The
operating band for the overnight rate is correspondingly lowered, and the Bank
Rate is now 3 3/4 per cent.
Information received since the January Monetary Policy Report Update (MPRU)
indicates that economic growth in Canada through the four quarters of 2007 was
broadly in line with expectations. Domestic demand has remained buoyant, as
rising commodity prices and high employment have continued to support income
growth. Canada's net exports weakened further in the fourth quarter, reflecting
the slowing U.S. economy and the impact of the past appreciation of the Canadian
dollar. Overall, the Canadian economy remained above its production capacity at
year-end. Core and total CPI inflation – at 1.4 per cent and 2.2 per cent,
respectively, in January – have also been consistent with the Bank's expectations.
At the same time, there are clear signs that the U.S. economy is likely to
experience a deeper and more prolonged slowdown than had been projected in
January. This stems from further weakening in the residential housing market,
which is adversely affecting other sectors of the U.S. economy and contributing to
further tightening in credit conditions. The deterioration in economic and financial
conditions in the United States can be expected to have significant spillover
effects on the global economy. These developments suggest that important
downside risks to Canada's economic outlook that were identified in the MPRU are
materializing and, in some respects, intensifying.
The Bank now judges that the balance of risks around its January projection for
inflation has clearly shifted to the downside, and, as a result, the Bank is lowering
the target for the overnight rate. Further monetary stimulus is likely to be
required in the near term to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance and
to achieve the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.
The Bank will publish a new projection for the economy and inflation, including
risks to the projection, in the Monetary Policy Report on 24 April 2008.
3/25/24, 3:27 PM
Bank of Canada lowers overnight rate target by 1/2 percentage point to 3 1/2 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2008/03/bank-canada-lowers-overnight-rate-5/
2/2
