Ottawa, Ontario
December 6, 2017
The Bank of Canada today maintained its target for the overnight rate at 1 per
cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent and the deposit rate is 3/4
per cent.
The global economy is evolving largely as expected in the Bank’s October
Monetary Policy Report (MPR). In the United States, growth in the third quarter was
stronger than forecast but is still expected to moderate in the months ahead.
Growth has firmed in other advanced economies. Meanwhile, oil prices have
moved higher and financial conditions have eased. The global outlook remains
subject to considerable uncertainty, notably about geopolitical developments and
trade policies.
Recent Canadian data are in line with October’s outlook, which was for growth to
moderate while remaining above potential in the second half of 2017.
Employment growth has been very strong and wages have shown some
improvement, supporting robust consumer spending in the third quarter.
Business investment continued to contribute to growth after a strong first half,
and public infrastructure spending is becoming more evident in the data.
Following exceptionally strong growth earlier in 2017, exports declined by more
than was expected in the third quarter. However,  the latest trade data support
the MPR projection that export growth will resume as foreign demand
strengthens. Housing has continued to moderate, as expected.
Inflation has been slightly higher than anticipated and will continue to be boosted
in the short term by temporary factors, particularly gasoline prices. Measures of
core inflation have edged up in recent months, reflecting the continued
absorption of economic slack. Revisions to past quarterly national accounts have
resulted in a higher level of GDP. However, this is unlikely to have significant
implications for the output gap because the revisions also imply a higher level of
potential output. Meanwhile, despite rising employment and participation rates,
other indicators point to ongoing­
 – albeit diminishing – slack in the labour market.
3/25/24, 2:07 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2017/12/fad-press-release-2017-12-06/
2/2
Based on the outlook for inflation and the evolution of the risks and uncertainties
identified in October’s MPR, Governing Council judges that the current stance of
monetary policy remains appropriate. While higher interest rates will likely be
required over time, Governing Council will continue to be cautious, guided by
incoming data in assessing the economy’s sensitivity to interest rates, the
evolution of economic capacity, and the dynamics of both wage growth and
inflation.
