Ottawa, Ontario
December 5, 2018
The Bank of Canada today maintained its target for the overnight rate at 1 ¾ per
cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 2 per cent and the deposit rate is 1 ½ per
cent.
The global economic expansion is moderating largely as expected, but signs are
emerging that trade conflicts are weighing more heavily on global demand.
Recent encouraging developments at the G20 meetings are a reminder that there
are upside as well as downside risks around trade policy. Growth in major
advanced economies has slowed, although activity in the United States remains
above potential.
Oil prices have fallen sharply since the October Monetary Policy Report (MPR),
reflecting a combination of geopolitical developments, uncertainty about global
growth prospects, and expansion of U.S. shale oil production. Benchmarks for
western Canadian oil – both heavy and, more recently, light – have been pulled
down even further by transportation constraints and a buildup of inventories. In
light of these developments and associated cutbacks in production, activity in
Canada’s energy sector will likely be materially weaker than expected.
The Canadian economy as a whole grew in line with the Bank’s projection in the
third quarter, although data suggest less momentum going into the fourth
quarter. Business investment fell in the third quarter, in large part due to
heightened trade uncertainty during the summer. Business investment outside
the energy sector is expected to strengthen with the signing of the USMCA, new
federal government tax measures, and ongoing capacity constraints. Along with
strong foreign demand, this increase in productive capacity should support
continued growth in exports.
Household credit and regional housing markets appear to be stabilizing following
a significant slowdown in recent quarters. The Bank continues to monitor the
impact on both builders and buyers of tighter mortgage rules, regional housing
policy changes, and higher interest rates.
3/25/24, 1:34 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1 ¾ per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2018/12/fad-press-release-2018-12-05/
2/2
Inflation has been evolving as expected and the Bank’s core measures are all
tracking 2 per cent, consistent with an economy that has been operating close to
its capacity. CPI inflation, at 2.4 per cent in October, is just above target but is
expected to ease in coming months by more than the Bank had previously
forecast, due to lower gasoline prices. Downward historical revisions by Statistics
Canada to GDP, together with recent macroeconomic developments, indicate
there may be additional room for non-inflationary growth. The Bank will reassess
all of these factors in its new projection for the January MPR.
Weighing all of these developments, Governing Council continues to judge that
the policy interest rate will need to rise into a neutral range to achieve the
inflation target. The appropriate pace of rate increases will depend on a number
of factors. These include the effect of higher interest rates on consumption and
housing, and global trade policy developments. The persistence of the oil price
shock, the evolution of business investment, and the Bank’s assessment of the
economy’s capacity will also factor importantly into our decisions about the future
stance of monetary policy. 
