Ottawa, Ontario
April 25, 2006
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is raising its target for the overnight
rate by one-quarter of one percentage point to 4 per cent. The operating band for
the overnight rate is correspondingly increased, and the Bank Rate is now
4 1/4 per cent.
The global economy has been growing at a robust pace, exhibiting a little more
momentum than had been anticipated. This global strength and the associated
higher prices of many commodities, together with strong domestic demand in
Canada, have produced solid growth in the Canadian economy at a pace
consistent with the Bank's outlook in the January Monetary Policy Report Update. At
the same time, global competition and the past appreciation of the Canadian
dollar continue to pose challenges for a number of sectors of the economy. All
factors considered, the Canadian economy is judged to be operating at, or just
above, its production capacity. High energy prices have kept total CPI inflation in
Canada somewhat above the Bank's 2 per cent target. Core inflation has
remained below 2 per cent owing to persistent downward pressure from prices of
imported consumer goods. Against this backdrop, the Bank decided to raise its
target for the overnight rate.
Looking forward, the Bank projects that the Canadian economy will grow by 3.1
per cent in 2006, 3.0 per cent in 2007, and 2.9 per cent in 2008. Total CPI inflation
is projected to average close to 2 per cent in 2007 and 2008 (excluding the effect
of any changes in the GST). The Bank judges that the risks to its projection are
roughly balanced, with a small tilt to the downside later in the projection period.
In line with the Bank's outlook for the Canadian economy, some modest further
increase in the policy interest rate may be required to keep aggregate supply and
demand in balance and inflation on target over the medium term. The Bank will
closely monitor evolving developments in the Canadian economy in light of the
cumulative increase in the policy interest rate since last September. A full analysis
of economic developments, trends, and risks will be provided in the Monetary
Policy Report, to be published on 27 April 2006.
