Ottawa, Ontario
June 7, 2023
The Bank of Canada today increased its target for the overnight rate to 4¾%, with
the Bank Rate at 5% and the deposit rate at 4¾%. The Bank is also continuing its
policy of quantitative tightening.
Globally, consumer price inflation is coming down, largely reflecting lower energy
prices compared to a year ago, but underlying inflation remains stubbornly high.
While economic growth around the world is softening in the face of higher
interest rates, major central banks are signalling that interest rates may have to
rise further to restore price stability. In the United States, the economy is slowing,
although consumer spending remains surprisingly resilient and the labour market
is still tight. Economic growth has essentially stalled in Europe but upward
pressure on core prices is persisting. Growth in China is expected to slow after
surging in the first quarter. Financial conditions have tightened back to those seen
before the bank failures in the United States and Switzerland.
Canada’s economy was stronger than expected in the first quarter of 2023, with
GDP growth of 3.1%. Consumption growth was surprisingly strong and broad-
based, even after accounting for the boost from population gains. Demand for
services continued to rebound. In addition, spending on interest-sensitive goods
increased and, more recently, housing market activity has picked up. The labour
market remains tight: higher immigration and participation rates are expanding
the supply of workers but new workers have been quickly hired, reflecting
continued strong demand for labour. Overall, excess demand in the economy
looks to be more persistent than anticipated.
CPI inflation ticked up in April to 4.4%, the first increase in 10 months, with prices
for a broad range of goods and services coming in higher than expected. Goods
price inflation increased, despite lower energy costs. Services price inflation
remained elevated, reflecting strong demand and a tight labour market. The Bank
continues to expect CPI inflation to ease to around 3% in the summer, as lower
energy prices feed through and last year’s large price gains fall out of the yearly
data. However, with three-month measures of core inflation running in the 3½-4%
range for several months and excess demand persisting, concerns have increased
that CPI inflation could get stuck materially above the 2% target.
3/23/24, 11:53 PM
Bank of Canada raises policy rate 25 basis points, continues quantitative tightening - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2023/06/fad-press-release-2023-06-07/
2/2
Based on the accumulation of evidence, Governing Council decided to increase
the policy interest rate, reflecting our view that monetary policy was not
sufficiently restrictive to bring supply and demand back into balance and return
inflation sustainably to the 2% target. Quantitative tightening is complementing
the restrictive stance of monetary policy and normalizing the Bank’s balance
sheet. Governing Council will continue to assess the dynamics of core inflation
and the outlook for CPI inflation. In particular, we will be evaluating whether the
evolution of excess demand, inflation expectations, wage growth and corporate
pricing behaviour are consistent with achieving the inflation target. The Bank
remains resolute in its commitment to restoring price stability for Canadians.
