Ottawa, Ontario
January 20, 2009
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is lowering its target for the
overnight rate by one-half of a percentage point to 1 per cent. The operating band
for the overnight rate is correspondingly lowered, and the Bank Rate is now
1 1/4 per cent.
The outlook for the global economy has deteriorated since the Bank's December
interest rate announcement, with the intensifying financial crisis spilling over into
real economic activity. Heightened uncertainty is undermining business and
household confidence worldwide and further eroding domestic demand. Major
advanced economies, including Canada's, are now in recession and emerging-
market economies are increasingly affected. Energy prices have fallen as a result
of substantially weaker global demand.
Stabilization of the global financial system is a precondition for economic
recovery. To that end, governments and central banks are taking bold and
concerted policy actions. There are signs that these extraordinary measures are
starting to gain traction, although it will take some time for financial conditions to
normalize. In addition, considerable monetary and fiscal policy stimulus is being
provided worldwide.
Canadian exports are down sharply, and domestic demand is shrinking as a result
of declines in real income, household wealth, and consumer and business
confidence. Canada's economy is projected to contract through mid-2009, with
real GDP dropping by 1.2 per cent this year on an annual average basis. As policy
actions begin to take hold in Canada and globally, and with support from the past
depreciation of the Canadian dollar, real GDP is expected to rebound, growing by
3.8 per cent in 2010.
A wider output gap through 2009 and modest decreases in housing prices should
cause core CPI inflation to ease, bottoming at 1.1 per cent in the fourth quarter.
Total CPI inflation is expected to dip below zero for two quarters in 2009,
reflecting year-on-year drops in energy prices. With inflation expectations well-
anchored, total and core inflation should return to the 2 per cent target in the first
half of 2011 as the economy returns to potential.
3/25/24, 3:25 PM
Bank of Canada lowers overnight rate target by 1/2 percentage point to 1 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2009/01/fad-press-release-2009-01-20/
2/2
Against this background, the Bank today lowered its policy rate by 50 basis points,
bringing the cumulative monetary policy easing to 350 basis points since
December 2007. Guided by Canada's inflation-targeting framework, the Bank will
continue to monitor carefully economic and financial developments in judging to
what extent further monetary stimulus will be required to achieve the 2 per cent
target over the medium term. Low, stable, and predictable inflation is the best
contribution monetary policy can make to long-term economic growth and
financial stability.
