Ottawa, Ontario
September 4, 2013
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent and
the deposit rate is 3/4 per cent.
The global economy continues to expand broadly as expected, but its dynamic
has moderated. In the United States, the process of normalization of long-term
interest rates has begun in the context of stronger private domestic demand.
Recent data, however, point to slightly less momentum overall than anticipated. In
Europe, there are early signs of a recovery, and Japan’s situation remains
promising. In a number of emerging market economies, financial volatility has
increased, adding uncertainty to growth prospects, although China continues to
grow at a solid pace. Commodity prices have been relatively stable, with
geopolitical stresses putting some upward pressure on global oil prices.
Uncertain global economic conditions appear to be delaying the anticipated
rotation of demand in Canada towards exports and investment. While the housing
sector has been slightly stronger than anticipated, household credit growth has
continued to slow and mortgage interest rates are higher, pointing to a continued
constructive evolution of household imbalances. Looking through the choppiness
of the recent data, the level of Canada’s GDP is largely consistent with the Bank’s
July forecast. The output gap is expected to begin to narrow in 2014.
Inflation in Canada remains subdued. With inflation expectations well-anchored,
both core and total CPI inflation are expected to return slowly to 2 per cent as the
output gap closes.
Against this backdrop, the Bank has decided to maintain the target for the
overnight rate at 1 per cent.  As long as there is significant slack in the Canadian
economy, the inflation outlook remains muted, and imbalances in the household
sector continue to evolve constructively, the considerable monetary policy
stimulus currently in place will remain appropriate. Over time, as the
normalization of these conditions unfolds, a gradual normalization of policy
interest rates can also be expected, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent
inflation target.
3/25/24, 2:28 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2013/09/fad-press-release-2013-09-04/
2/2
