Ottawa, Ontario
July 15, 2008
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 3 per cent. The operating band for the overnight rate is
unchanged, and the Bank Rate remains at 3 1/4 per cent.
Three major developments are affecting the Canadian economy: the protracted
weakness in the U.S. economy; ongoing turbulence in global financial markets;
and sharp increases in many commodity prices. The first two developments are
evolving roughly in line with expectations in the April Monetary Policy Report.
However, commodity prices are continuing to outstrip earlier expectations. This
has led to further increases in Canada's terms of trade and real national income,
and has altered the outlook for global and domestic inflation.
Although Canadian economic growth in the first quarter was weaker than
expected, final domestic demand continues to expand at a solid pace. The
economy is judged to have moved into slight excess supply in the second quarter
of this year; excess supply is expected to increase over the balance of the year.
High terms of trade, accommodative monetary policy, and a gradual recovery in
the U.S. economy are expected to generate above-potential growth starting early
next year, bringing the economy back to full capacity around mid-2010. Canadian
GDP is projected to grow by 1.0 per cent in 2008, 2.3 per cent in 2009, and 3.3 per
cent in 2010.
Total CPI inflation over the next year is expected to be much higher than
projected at the time of the April Report. Assuming energy prices follow current
futures prices over the projection period, total CPI inflation is projected to rise
temporarily above 4 per cent, peaking in the first quarter of 2009. As energy
prices stabilize and with medium-term inflation expectations remaining well
anchored, total inflation is then projected to converge to the core rate of inflation
at the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2009. Core inflation is projected to
remain well contained and broadly in line with earlier expectations, averaging
close to 1.5 per cent through the third quarter of this year and then rising to 2 per
cent in the second half of 2009.
3/25/24, 3:26 PM
Bank of Canada keeps overnight rate target at 3 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2008/07/bank-canada-keeps-overnight-rate-at-3-per-cent-2/
2/2
The three major developments affecting the Canadian economy pose significant
upside and downside risks to the Bank's base-case projection. Weighing the
implications of these, the Bank views the risks to its base-case projection for
inflation as balanced.
Against this backdrop, the Bank judges that the current level of the target for the
overnight rate remains appropriate. The Bank will continue to monitor carefully
the evolution of risks, together with economic and financial developments in the
Canadian and global economies, and set monetary policy consistent with
achieving the inflation target over the medium term.
The Bank's detailed projection for the economy and inflation, and its assessment
of risks to the projection, will be published in the Monetary Policy Report Update on
17 July 2008.
