Ottawa, Ontario
July 10, 2007
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is raising its target for the overnight
rate by one-quarter of one percentage point to 4 1/2 per cent. The operating band
for the overnight rate is correspondingly increased, and the Bank Rate is now 4
3/4 per cent.
Economic growth and inflation in Canada in the first half of this year have been
stronger than expected in the April Monetary Policy Report (MPR). Final domestic
demand has remained the key driver of economic growth in Canada, bolstered by
firm commodity prices. The Bank judges that the economy is now operating
further above its production potential than was projected at the time of the April
MPR. Both total CPI and core inflation have been higher than projected in April
and are above the 2 per cent inflation target. Longer-term interest rates have
increased and the Canadian dollar has appreciated sharply, moving well above
the trading range assumed in the last MPR.
The Canadian economy is now projected to grow by 2.5 per cent in 2007,
somewhat stronger than was expected in April, and to grow somewhat more
slowly in 2008 and 2009 than previously projected. In this new projection, higher
interest rates across the yield curve and a higher assumed range for the Canadian
dollar of 93 to 95.5 cents U.S. act to moderate growth in 2008 and 2009 to an
average of about 2 1/2 per cent. This brings aggregate demand and supply in
Canada back into balance in 2009.
Inflation is projected to be slightly higher and more persistent than in the April
MPR. However, as excess demand diminishes, total CPI and core inflation should
decline to 2 per cent by early 2009.
There are both upside and downside risks to the Bank's inflation projection. The
main upside risk is that household demand in Canada could be stronger than
expected. The main downside risks are related to the higher Canadian dollar and
the ongoing adjustment in the U.S. housing sector. In the context of the Bank's
new projection, these risks appear to be roughly balanced.
3/25/24, 3:33 PM
Bank of Canada raises overnight rate target by 1/4 percentage point to 4 1/2 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2007/07/bank-canada-raise-overnight-rate-target/
2/2
In line with this outlook, the Bank is raising the target for the overnight rate to 4
1/2 per cent. Some modest further increase in the overnight rate may be required
to bring inflation back to the target over the medium term.
An analysis of the Bank's outlook for growth and inflation, including economic and
financial developments and risks to the projection, will be set out in the Monetary
Policy Report Update, to be published on 12 July 2007.
