Ottawa, Ontario
December 8, 2009
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1/4 per cent. The Bank Rate is unchanged at 1/2 per cent and the
deposit rate is 1/4 per cent.
While significant fragilities remain, global economic developments have been
slightly more positive and the global outlook has improved modestly relative to
the Bank's projection in its October Monetary Policy Report (MPR).
In Canada, as expected, the composition of aggregate demand is shifting towards
final domestic demand and away from net exports. In the third quarter, the
balance of these shifts resulted in weaker-than-projected GDP growth. Core
inflation in recent months has been slightly higher than the Bank had projected,
although total CPI inflation remains close to projections.
The main drivers and the profile of the projected recovery in Canada remain
consistent with the Bank's views in the October MPR. The Bank continues to
expect economic growth to become more solidly entrenched over the projection
period and inflation to return to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2011.
Conditional on the outlook for inflation, the target overnight rate can be expected
to remain at its current level until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order
to achieve the inflation target. In its conduct of monetary policy at low interest
rates, the Bank retains considerable flexibility, consistent with the framework
outlined in the April MPR.
3/25/24, 3:23 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1/4 per cent and reiterates conditional commitment to hold current policy rate until the end of t…
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2009/12/fad-press-release-2009-12-08/
2/2
The risks to the outlook for inflation continue to be those outlined in the October
MPR. On the upside, the main risks are stronger-than-projected global and
domestic demand. On the downside, the main risks are a more protracted global
recovery and persistent strength in the Canadian dollar that could act as a
significant further drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on
inflation. The Bank views all of these risks through the prism of achieving the 2
per cent inflation target.
While the underlying macroeconomic risks to the projection are roughly balanced,
the Bank judges that, as a consequence of operating at the effective lower bound,
the overall risks to its inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside.
