Ottawa, Ontario
March 1, 2011
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent and
the deposit rate is 3/4 per cent.
The global economic recovery is proceeding broadly in line with the Bank’s
projection in its January Monetary Policy Report (MPR), although risks remain
elevated.  U.S. activity is solidifying and remains supported by stimulative fiscal
and monetary policies.  Ongoing challenges associated with sovereign and bank
balance sheets will limit the pace of the European recovery and are a significant
source of uncertainty to the global outlook. Robust demand from emerging-
market economies is driving the underlying strength in commodity prices, which
could be further reinforced temporarily by supply shocks arising from recent
geopolitical events.
The recovery in Canada is proceeding slightly faster than expected, and there is
more evidence of the anticipated rebalancing of demand.  While consumption
growth remains strong, there are signs that household spending is moving more
in line with the growth in household incomes. Business investment continues to
expand rapidly as companies take advantage of stimulative financial conditions
and respond to competitive imperatives.  There is early evidence of a recovery in
net exports, supported by stronger U.S. activity and global demand for
commodities. However, the export sector continues to face considerable
challenges from the cumulative effects of the persistent strength in the Canadian
dollar and Canada’s poor relative productivity performance.
While global inflationary pressures are rising, inflation in Canada has been
consistent with the Bank's expectations. Underlying pressures affecting prices
remain subdued, reflecting the considerable slack in the economy.
Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank has decided to maintain the target for the
overnight rate at 1 per cent. This leaves considerable monetary stimulus in place,
consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an environment of
significant excess supply in Canada. Any further reduction in monetary policy
stimulus would need to be carefully considered.
3/25/24, 3:20 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2011/03/fad-press-release-2011-03-01/
2/2
