Ottawa, Ontario
May 30, 2018
The Bank of Canada today maintained its target for the overnight rate at 1¼ per
cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1½ per cent and the deposit rate is 1 per
cent.
Global economic activity remains broadly on track with the Bank’s April Monetary
Policy Report (MPR) forecast. Recent data point to some upside to the outlook for
the US economy. At the same time, ongoing uncertainty about trade policies is
dampening global business investment and stresses are developing in some
emerging market economies. Global oil prices have been higher than assumed in
April, in part reflecting geopolitical developments.
Inflation in Canada has been close to the 2 per cent target and will likely be a bit
higher in the near term than forecast in April, largely because of recent increases
in gasoline prices. Core measures of inflation remain near 2 per cent, consistent
with an economy operating close to potential. As usual, the Bank will look through
the transitory impact of fluctuations in gasoline prices.
In Canada, economic data since the April MPR have, on balance, supported the
Bank’s outlook for growth around 2 per cent in the first half of 2018. Activity in the
first quarter appears to have been a little stronger than projected.  Exports of
goods were more robust than forecast, and data on imports of machinery and
equipment suggest continued recovery in investment. Housing resale activity has
remained soft into the second quarter, as the housing market continues to adjust
to new mortgage guidelines and higher borrowing rates. Going forward, solid
labour income growth supports the expectation that housing activity will pick up
and consumption will continue to contribute importantly to growth in 2018.
Overall, developments since April further reinforce Governing Council’s view that
higher interest rates will be warranted to keep inflation near target. Governing
Council will take a gradual approach to policy adjustments, guided by incoming
data. In particular, the Bank will continue to assess the economy’s sensitivity to
interest rate movements and the evolution of economic capacity.
3/25/24, 2:06 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1¼ per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2018/05/fad-press-release-2018-05-30/
2/2
