Ottawa, Ontario
September 9, 2015
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1/2 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 3/4 per cent and
the deposit rate is 1/4 per cent.
Inflation has evolved in line with the outlook in the Bank’s July Monetary Policy
Report (MPR). Total CPI inflation remains near the bottom of the target range,
reflecting year-over-year price declines for consumer energy products. Core
inflation has been close to 2 per cent, with disinflationary pressures from
economic slack being offset by transitory effects of the past depreciation of the
Canadian dollar and some sector-specific factors. The dynamics of GDP growth in
Canada outlined in July’s MPR also remain intact. The stimulative effects of
previous monetary policy actions are working their way through the Canadian
economy.
Canada’s resource sector continues to adjust to lower prices for oil and other
commodities, with some spillover to the rest of the economy. These adjustments
are complex and are expected to take considerable time. Economic activity
continues to be underpinned by solid household spending and a firm recovery in
the United States, with particular strength in the sectors of the U.S. economy that
are important for Canadian exports.
Increasing uncertainty about growth prospects for China and other emerging-
market economies, in contrast, is raising questions about the pace of the global
recovery. This has contributed to heightened financial market volatility and lower
commodity prices. Movements in the Canadian dollar are helping to absorb some
of the impact of lower commodity prices and are facilitating the adjustments
taking place in Canada’s economy. While the overall export picture is still
uncertain, the latest data confirm that exchange rate-sensitive exports are
regaining momentum.
Meanwhile, risks to financial stability are evolving as expected. Taking all of these
developments into consideration, the Bank judges that the risks to the outlook for
inflation remain within the zone for which the current stance of monetary policy is
appropriate. Therefore, the target for the overnight rate remains at 1/2 per cent.
3/25/24, 2:16 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1/2 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2015/09/fad-press-release-2015-09-09/
2/2
