Ottawa, Ontario
September 3, 2014
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent and
the deposit rate is 3/4 per cent.
Inflation is close to the 2 per cent target and is evolving as the Bank anticipated in
its July Monetary Policy Report (MPR). Recent data reinforce the Bank’s view that the
earlier pickup in inflation was attributable to the temporary effects of higher
energy prices, exchange rate pass-through, and other sector-specific factors
rather than to any change in domestic economic fundamentals.
The global economy is performing largely as expected. The recovery in Europe
appears to be faltering as the situation in Ukraine weighs on confidence. In the
United States, a solid recovery seems to be back on track, with business
investment now making a significant contribution to growth. Global financial
conditions remain very stimulative and longer-term bond yields have eased even
further.
In Canada, stronger growth in the second quarter has brought GDP to almost
exactly the level the Bank had projected in July's MPR. Canadian exports surged in
the second quarter after a weak winter, supported notably by stronger U.S.
investment spending and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar. While an
increasing number of export sectors appear to be turning the corner toward
recovery, this pickup will need to be sustained before it will translate into higher
business investment and hiring. Meanwhile, activity in the housing market has
been stronger than anticipated. The Bank still expects excess capacity in the
economy to be absorbed during the next two years.  
Overall, the risks to the outlook for inflation remain roughly balanced, while the
risks associated with household imbalances have not diminished. The balance of
these risks is still within the zone for which the current stance of monetary policy
is appropriate and therefore the target for the overnight rate remains at 1 per
cent. The Bank remains neutral with respect to the next change to the policy rate:
its timing and direction will depend on how new information influences the
outlook and assessment of risks.
3/25/24, 2:19 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2014/09/fad-press-release-2014-09-03/
2/2
