Ottawa, Ontario
December 7, 2022
The Bank of Canada today increased its target for the overnight rate to 4¼%, with
the Bank Rate at 4½% and the deposit rate at 4¼%. The Bank is also continuing its
policy of quantitative tightening.
Inflation around the world remains high and broadly based. Global economic
growth is slowing, although it is proving more resilient than was expected at the
time of the October Monetary Policy Report (MPR). In the United States, the
economy is weakening but consumption continues to be solid and the labour
market remains overheated. The gradual easing of global supply bottlenecks
continues, although further progress could be disrupted by geopolitical events.
In Canada, GDP growth in the third quarter was stronger than expected, and the
economy continued to operate in excess demand. Canada’s labour market
remains tight, with unemployment near historic lows. While commodity exports
have been strong, there is growing evidence that tighter monetary policy is
restraining domestic demand: consumption moderated in the third quarter, and
housing market activity continues to decline. Overall, the data since the October
MPR support the Bank’s outlook that growth will essentially stall through the end
of this year and the first half of next year.
CPI inflation remained at 6.9% in October, with many of the goods and services
Canadians regularly buy showing large price increases. Measures of core inflation
remain around 5%. Three-month rates of change in core inflation have come
down, an early indicator that price pressures may be losing momentum. However,
inflation is still too high and short-term inflation expectations remain elevated.
The longer that consumers and businesses expect inflation to be above the target,
the greater the risk that elevated inflation becomes entrenched.
3/23/24, 11:57 PM
Bank of Canada increases policy interest rate by 50 basis points, continues quantitative tightening - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2022/12/fad-press-release-2022-12-07/
2/2
Looking ahead, Governing Council will be considering whether the policy interest
rate needs to rise further to bring supply and demand back into balance and
return inflation to target. Governing Council continues to assess how tighter
monetary policy is working to slow demand, how supply challenges are resolving,
and how inflation and inflation expectations are responding. Quantitative
tightening is complementing increases in the policy rate. We are resolute in our
commitment to achieving the 2% inflation target and restoring price stability for
Canadians.
