Ottawa, Ontario
September 4, 2019
The Bank of Canada today maintained its target for the overnight rate at 1 ¾
percent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 2 percent and the deposit rate is 1 ½
percent.
As the US-China trade conflict has escalated, world trade has contracted and
business investment has weakened. This is weighing more heavily on global
economic momentum than the Bank had projected in its July Monetary Policy
Report (MPR). Meanwhile, growth in the United States has moderated but remains
solid, supported by consumer and government spending. Commodity prices have
drifted down as concerns about global growth prospects have increased. These
concerns, combined with policy responses by some central banks, have pushed
bond yields to historic lows and inverted yield curves in a number of economies,
including Canada.
In Canada, growth in the second quarter was strong and exceeded the Bank’s July
expectation, although some of this strength is expected to be temporary. The
rebound was driven by stronger energy production and robust export growth,
both recovering from very weak performance in the first quarter. Housing activity
has regained strength more quickly than expected as resales and housing starts
catch up to underlying demand, supported by lower mortgage rates. This could
add to already-high household debt levels, although mortgage underwriting rules
should help to contain the buildup of vulnerabilities. Wages have picked up
further, boosting labour income, yet consumption spending was unexpectedly
soft in the quarter.  Business investment contracted sharply after a strong first
quarter, amid heightened trade uncertainty. Given this composition of growth, the
Bank expects economic activity to slow in the second half of the year.
Inflation is at the 2 percent target. CPI inflation in July was stronger than expected,
largely because of temporary factors. These include higher prices for air travel,
mobile phones, and some food items, which are offsetting the effects of lower
gasoline prices. Measures of core inflation all remain around 2 percent.
3/25/24, 1:32 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1 ¾ percent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2019/09/fad-press-release-2019-09-04/
2/2
In sum, Canada’s economy is operating close to potential and inflation is on
target. However, escalating trade conflicts and related uncertainty are taking a toll
on the global and Canadian economies. In this context, the current degree of
monetary policy stimulus remains appropriate. As the Bank works to update its
projection in light of incoming data, Governing Council will pay particular attention
to global developments and their impact on the outlook for Canadian growth and
inflation.
