Ottawa, Ontario
September 5, 2007
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 4 1/2 per cent. The operating band for the overnight rate is
unchanged, and the Bank Rate remains at 4 3/4 per cent.
Near-term prospects for economic growth outside North America appear to be
slightly stronger than anticipated in the July Monetary Policy Report Update (MPRU),
while near-term economic prospects for the United States are weaker than
expected. It now seems likely that the adjustment in the U.S. residential housing
sector will be more pronounced and protracted, exacerbated by recent
developments in financial markets. On balance, this implies weaker demand for
Canadian exports than had been expected at the time of the July MPRU.
In Canada, total and core CPI inflation in July, at 2.2 per cent and 2.3 per cent
respectively, continued to be above the inflation target but generally in line with
the Bank's expectations. The Canadian dollar has also largely traded in the range
assumed in the July MPRU. At the same time, the pace of economic growth in the
first half of this year was above the Bank's expectations. It now appears that the
Canadian economy is operating further above its production potential than was
estimated in July. Domestic demand remains robust, buoyed by a continuing
strong labour market and higher-than-expected increases in home sales and
prices. However, recent developments in financial markets have led to some
tightening of credit conditions for Canadian borrowers, which should temper
growth in domestic demand.
Against this background, the Bank judges that the current level of the target for
the overnight rate is appropriate. However, there are significant upside and
downside risks to the outlook for inflation. On the upside, there is a possibility
that household demand in Canada could be stronger than anticipated, while on
the downside the ongoing adjustment in the U.S. housing sector could be more
severe and spill over to the U.S. economy more broadly. In addition, there is
uncertainty about the extent and duration of the tightening of credit conditions in
Canada and, hence, about the tempering effect this will have on growth in
domestic demand.
3/25/24, 3:32 PM
Bank of Canada keeps target for the overnight rate at 4 1/2 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2007/09/bank-canada-keeps-target-overnight-rate-12/
2/2
The Bank will continue to closely monitor evolving economic and financial
developments. A full update of the Bank's outlook for growth and inflation,
including risks to the projection, will be set out in the Monetary Policy Report, to be
published on 18 October 2007.
