Ottawa, Ontario
April 12, 2011
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent and
the deposit rate is 3/4 per cent.
As anticipated in the January Monetary Policy Report (MPR), the global economic
recovery is becoming more firmly entrenched and is expected to continue at a
steady pace.  In the United States, growth is solidifying, although consolidation of
household and ultimately government balance sheets will limit the pace of the
expansion.  European growth has strengthened, despite ongoing sovereign debt
and banking challenges in the periphery.  The disasters that struck Japan in March
will severely affect its economic activity in the first half of this year and create
short-term disruptions to supply chains in advanced economies.  Robust demand
from emerging-market economies is driving the underlying strength in commodity
prices, which is being further reinforced by supply shocks arising from recent
geopolitical events. These price increases, combined with persistent excess
demand conditions in major emerging-market economies, are contributing to the
emergence of broader global inflationary pressures.  Despite the significant
challenges that weigh on the global outlook, global financial conditions remain
very stimulative and investors have become noticeably less risk averse.
Although recent economic activity in Canada has been stronger than the Bank had
anticipated, the profile is largely consistent with the underlying dynamics outlined
in the January MPR.  Aggregate demand is rebalancing toward business
investment and net exports, and away from government and household
expenditures. As in January, the Bank expects business investment to continue to
rise rapidly and the growth of consumer spending to evolve broadly in line with
that of personal disposable income, although higher terms of trade and wealth
are likely to support a slightly stronger profile for household expenditures than
previously projected.  In contrast, the improvement in net exports is expected to
be further restrained by ongoing competitiveness challenges, which have been
reinforced by the recent strength of the Canadian dollar.
3/25/24, 3:20 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2011/04/fad-press-release-2011-04-12/
2/2
Overall, the Bank projects that the economy will expand by 2.9 per cent in 2011
and 2.6 per cent in 2012. Growth in 2013 is expected to equal that of potential
output, at 2.1 per cent. The Bank expects that the economy will return to capacity
in the middle of 2012, two quarters earlier than had been projected in the January
MPR.
While underlying inflation is subdued, a number of temporary factors will boost
total CPI inflation to around 3 per cent in the second quarter of 2011 before total
CPI inflation converges to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012. This short-
term volatility reflects the impact of recent sharp increases in energy prices and
the ongoing boost from changes in provincial indirect taxes. Core inflation has
fallen further in recent months, in part due to temporary factors. It is expected to
rise gradually to 2 per cent by the middle of 2012 as excess supply in the economy
is slowly absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity
recovers and inflation expectations remain well-anchored.
The persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could create even greater
headwinds for the Canadian economy, putting additional downward pressure on
inflation through weaker-than-expected net exports and larger declines in import
prices.
Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank has decided to maintain the target for the
overnight rate at 1 per cent. This leaves considerable monetary stimulus in place,
consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an environment of
material excess supply in Canada. Any further reduction in monetary policy
stimulus would need to be carefully considered.
