Ottawa, Ontario
March 9, 2016
The Bank of Canada today announced that it is maintaining its target for the
overnight rate at 1/2 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 3/4 per cent and
the deposit rate is 1/4 per cent.
The global economy is progressing largely as the Bank anticipated in its January
Monetary Policy Report (MPR). Financial market volatility, reflecting heightened
concerns about economic momentum, appears to be abating. Although downside
risks remain, the Bank still expects global growth to strengthen this year and next.
Recent data indicate that the U.S. expansion remains broadly on track. At the
same time, the low level of oil prices will continue to dampen growth in Canada
and other energy-producing countries.
Prices of oil and other commodities have rebounded in recent weeks. In this
context, and in light of shifting expectations for monetary policy in Canada and
the United States, the Canadian dollar has appreciated from its recent lows. With
these movements, both the price of oil and the exchange rate have averaged
close to levels assumed in the January MPR.
Canada’s GDP growth in the fourth quarter was not as weak as expected, but the
near-term outlook for the economy remains broadly the same as in January.
National employment has held up despite job losses in resource-intensive
regions, and household spending continues to underpin domestic demand. Non-
energy exports are gathering momentum, particularly in sectors that are sensitive
to exchange rate movements. However, overall business investment remains very
weak due to retrenchment in the resource sector.
Inflation in Canada is evolving broadly as anticipated. The factors that pushed
total CPI inflation up to 2 per cent will likely unwind in the months ahead.
Measures of core inflation are at or just below 2 per cent, boosted by the
temporary effects of past exchange rate depreciation. Material excess capacity in
the Canadian economy will continue to dampen inflation.
3/25/24, 2:11 PM
Bank of Canada maintains overnight rate target at 1/2 per cent - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2016/03/fad-press-release-2016-03-09/
2/2
An assessment of the impact of the upcoming federal budget’s fiscal measures
will be incorporated into the Bank’s April projection. All things considered, the
risks to the profile for inflation are roughly balanced. Meanwhile, financial
vulnerabilities continue to edge higher, in part due to regional shifts in activity
associated with the structural adjustment underway in Canada’s economy. The
Bank’s Governing Council judges that the overall balance of risks remains within
the zone for which the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate, and the
target for the overnight rate remains at 1/2 per cent.
