Ottawa, Ontario
September 7, 2022
The Bank of Canada today increased its target for the overnight rate to 3¼%, with
the Bank Rate at 3½% and the deposit rate at 3¼%. The Bank is also continuing its
policy of quantitative tightening.
The global and Canadian economies are evolving broadly in line with the Bank’s
July projection. The effects of COVID-19 outbreaks, ongoing supply disruptions,
and the war in Ukraine continue to dampen growth and boost prices.
Global inflation remains high and measures of core inflation are moving up in
most countries. In response, central banks around the world continue to tighten
monetary policy. Economic activity in the United States has moderated, although
the US labour market remains tight. China is facing ongoing challenges from
COVID shutdowns. Commodity prices have been volatile: oil, wheat and lumber
prices have moderated while natural gas prices have risen.
In Canada, CPI inflation eased in July to 7.6% from 8.1% because of a drop in
gasoline prices.  However, inflation excluding gasoline increased and data indicate
a further broadening of price pressures, particularly in services. The Bank’s core
measures of inflation continued to move up, ranging from 5% to 5.5% in July.
Surveys suggest that short-term inflation expectations remain high. The longer
this continues, the greater the risk that elevated inflation becomes entrenched.
The Canadian economy continues to operate in excess demand and labour
markets remain tight. Canada’s GDP grew by 3.3% in the second quarter. While
this was somewhat weaker than the Bank had projected, indicators of domestic
demand were very strong – consumption grew by about 9½% and business
investment was up by close to 12%. With higher mortgage rates, the housing
market is pulling back as anticipated, following unsustainable growth during the
pandemic. The Bank continues to expect the economy to moderate in the second
half of this year, as global demand weakens and tighter monetary policy here in
Canada begins to bring demand more in line with supply.
3/23/24, 11:59 PM
Bank of Canada increases policy interest rate by 75 basis points, continues quantitative tightening - Bank of Canada
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2022/09/fad-press-release-2022-09-07/
2/2
Given the outlook for inflation, the Governing Council still judges that the policy
interest rate will need to rise further. Quantitative tightening is complementing
increases in the policy rate. As the effects of tighter monetary policy work through
the economy, we will be assessing how much higher interest rates need to go to
return inflation to target. The Governing Council remains resolute in its
commitment to price stability and will continue to take action as required to
achieve the 2% inflation target.
