
Global economic growth is expected to moderate to a more sustainable pace of around 31/2 per cent in 2019 and 2020. Growth in the second half of 2018 is estimated to have eased by somewhat more than forecast in October, due primarily to temporary factors in the euro area and Japan. The US economy remained robust, supported by fiscal stimulus.

The global outlook continues to face important uncertainties. The United States and China have taken some positive steps but have not yet reached an agreement on trade issues. The dispute is reducing US–China trade in products subject to the increases in tariffs and is weighing on activity and sentiment globally. Among other geopolitical tensions, the future of Brexit is unclear as the scheduled date for the United Kingdom’s departure from the European Union approaches. The nature and timing of any resolution of these issues are difficult to predict. The Bank continues 
to incorporate the adverse effects of uncertainty and the impact of tariff 
actions into its outlook.
 
The confluence of trade conflicts, geopolitical tensions and emerging signs of their economic impacts is leading markets to reassess global growth prospects and reprice most asset classes. Many private sector forecasts for global growth have been revised down. There has been no net change in the Bank’s forecast for growth in 2019 because impacts of trade and geopolitical tensions had already been incorporated. Oil prices have fallen since the October Monetary Policy Report, driven by stronger supply and concerns about weaker global demand. Lower oil prices are expected to provide a modest boost to growth in oil-importing countries while dampening growth for oil exporters.

Market unease over global growth has contributed to an overall decline in equity prices and bond yields, increased volatility and a broad-based widening in corporate credit spreads. A tightening of corporate credit conditions has been particularly evident in the North American energy sector, given the decline in oil prices. 

In 2018, central banks in many countries were taking steps to gradually normalize monetary policy. Amid indications that trade and geopolitical tensions are taking a toll on activity, markets now anticipate that major central banks will withdraw less monetary stimulus in 2019 than previously expected. In conjunction with falling government bond yields, the US yield 
curve has flattened further.

Meanwhile, portfolio inflows to emerging-market economies (EMEs) have resumed since a mid-year sell off, and most EMEs have seen their currencies appreciate from the low levels of last year.

Global oil prices have recently averaged about 25 per cent lower than assumed in the October Report. Steadily increasing US oil production has been an important driver of the low prices. Global oil output was estimated to be about 3 million barrels per day higher in the fourth quarter of 2018 than in the same period in 2017, about two-thirds of which was due to higher US production. Since October, rising US shale production and output from members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) have contributed to the price declines, alongside concerns that trade and geopolitical risks could weigh on global demand.
 
Looking ahead, OPEC and some non-OPEC oil-producing countries have agreed to cut output over the first half of 2019 to help offset some of the supply increases. In Canada, mandatory production curtailments for 2019, announced by the Alberta government in early December, have narrowed the differential between prices received by western Canadian producers and global benchmarks.

There is considerable uncertainty around the future path for global oil prices. The most important considerations are whether supply continues to outpace demand and whether market concerns about the US–China conflict abate.

The Bank’s non-energy commodity price index is modestly weaker than in October. The market reassessment of global growth prospects has been reflected in further declines in prices for base metals and agricultural products.

The US economy has continued to expand at a pace well above potential in recent quarters. Consumption growth has been bolstered by the strong labour market and the 2018 tax cuts. Business investment growth continues to be healthy, even though it has softened recently. Meanwhile, residential investment is being held back by deteriorating affordability and supply constraints. Trade in goods subject to increases in tariffs has declined in recent months, with agricultural and steel and aluminum products most affected. There are signs that US producers facing higher tariffs from China are finding new markets, which has helped mitigate the impact of the tariffs on total exports. For instance, US exports of agricultural products to countries other than China have increased sharply.

Over the projection horizon, growth of US gross domestic product (GDP) is expected to moderate to around 21/2 per cent in 2019 and around 11/2 per cent in 2020. This leaves US growth somewhat below the Bank’s estimate of US potential output growth at the end of the projection horizon. The slowdown mainly reflects the waning of fiscal stimulus, the adverse impact of trade actions and related uncertainty, and less accommodative monetary policy.

Core inflation has remained close to 2 per cent in recent months and is expected to stay near the Federal Reserve’s inflation target as growth moderates.

Growth in the euro area was weaker in the third quarter of 2018 than expected. The auto sector played a key role in the weakness because automakers were adjusting to new emission standards. Recent survey data indicate a broader softening in both services and manufacturing activity, suggesting that trade policy uncertainty and geopolitical tensions are starting to have a negative impact on the economy. Consumer confidence has fallen in the face of fiscal challenges in Italy, renewed uncertainty about 
Brexit and social unrest in France. The labour market has nonetheless continued to improve, as reflected by rising wage growth.

The Bank expects the euro area economy to grow at a rate just above potential output growth over the projection horizon, supported in part by solid foreign demand and low oil prices. Core inflation remains subdued and is anticipated to rise only gradually.

Growth in China is expected to moderate from around 6 1/2 per cent in 2018 to just below 6 per cent in 2020. Policy-makers are continuing to provide support to offset headwinds from trade tensions and deleveraging. The adverse effects of trade tensions have become more evident in survey data about Chinese manufacturing. Authorities have encouraged more bank lending, particularly to small and medium-sized enterprises, and have announced expansionary fiscal measures.

The financial stress experienced by Argentina and Turkey in 2018 is expected to continue to temper growth in oil-importing EMEs in 2019. Growth in this group of countries is anticipated to recover to around 41/2 per cent in 2020. Growth in oil-exporting EMEs has been revised down relative to the October Report, given the fall in oil prices. 
	
The Canadian economy has been operating near capacity for over a year now. In addition, job growth has been strong, the unemployment rate is at a 40-year low and inflation is close to target. The main changes to the outlook result from developments in oil markets.

GDP growth is estimated to slow temporarily in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of 2019 mainly as a result of the lower oil prices. Overall, the impact of the oil price decline is expected to be about one-quarter the size of that in the 2014–16 episode. Oil prices have fallen by less than in 2014, and oil production represents a smaller nominal share of the Canadian economy today.

After this temporary slowdown, the pace of economic activity in Canada is expected to average above potential growth. Economic activity should continue to be supported by strong employment, expanding foreign demand and accommodative financial conditions. Business investment and exports outside the energy sector are projected to grow steadily and will benefit from favourable arrangements with many trading partners and recently announced federal tax measures targeting investment. Ongoing gains in employment and wages should continue to underpin consumption as households adjust to the tighter mortgage guidelines and increases in mortgage rates. However, housing activity has recently been weaker than anticipated and is expected to remain soft over the projection horizon.

The outlook is subject to several sources of uncertainty, including the persistence of the oil price decline and the size of spillovers to non-oil-producing regions, the adjustment of household spending to tighter mortgage finance guidelines and higher interest rates, and global trade policy and geopolitical issues.

Consumer price index (CPI) inflation is estimated at 2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2018. The Bank’s projection for CPI inflation is lower than in the October Report, reflecting lower gasoline prices. Inflation is now anticipated to decline temporarily before returning to 2 per cent by the end of 2019.

Real GDP grew by 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2018, but with a different composition of growth than anticipated in the October Report. GDP growth was supported by government spending and exports, while private domestic demand was weak. Growth of consumption and residential investment slowed markedly. Business investment fell in the third quarter, with notable weakness in the energy sector and a transitory decline in spending on aircraft and other transportation equipment. Some of the weakness in investment also likely reflected the impact of elevated trade policy uncertainty. 

The Bank estimates that growth in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of 2019 will average about 1 per cent as low oil prices and adjustment in the housing market create headwinds to growth. This outlook is about 11/4 percentage points weaker on average than in the October Report, with the further decline in oil prices since October explaining more than half of the revision. 

Provincial and municipal housing market policies, the tighter mortgage finance guidelines and higher mortgage rates continue to weigh on housing activity. Slowing of activity in some markets has been associated with less speculative activity. As a result, it is difficult to evaluate the sensitivity of non-speculative demand to the various policy changes. Monthly indicators have signalled that 
spending on housing likely contracted again in the fourth quarter. Weaker-than-expected housing activity in recent months and staff analysis suggest that the combined effect of tighter mortgage guidelines and higher interest rates has been larger than previously estimated. The Bank will continue to monitor developments in housing markets to assess how construction is adjusting to the shift in demand toward lower-value units.

Investment in the energy sector is expected to contract because of low oil prices and production curtailments in Alberta. In autumn 2018, historically high production levels coupled with temporary maintenance shutdowns of US refineries contributed to a large buildup in inventories of crude oil and a decline in prices of western Canadian oil relative to global price benchmarks. The completion of US refinery maintenance and lower production near the end of the fourth quarter initiated an inventory correction. The drawdown of inventories should continue with the mandated curtailments of Alberta oil 
production that took effect at the start of 2019. These inventory movements added to GDP growth in the second half of 2018 and are expected to subtract from it in the first quarter of 2019. As a result, real GDP growth is expected to remain slow in the first quarter, even though growth of final domestic demand should pick up. In contrast, in most industries, solid foreign demand, ongoing capacity pressures and the signing of the Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (CUSMA) are expected to support business investment.

Labour markets continue to be healthy: employment growth is strong and the unemployment rate is at a 40-year low. Most firms outside oil-producing regions continue to report some or significant capacity pressures and intensifying labour shortages, as noted in the winter Business Outlook Survey. Labour pressures are subsiding in areas affected by the fall in oil prices. The slowing of overall wage growth over the past year is being driven by developments in oil-producing regions. Elsewhere, wage growth has remained steady since the beginning of 2017. Against this backdrop, job churn has been increasing, which is an encouraging sign for future wage growth.

The Bank estimates that the output gap was between -1 and 0 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2018. This range implies more slack than was assumed in the October Report, mainly reflecting that growth in the fourth quarter is estimated to have been slower than potential. However, the increase in slack is likely to be contained to oil-producing regions.

Core inflation measures have been tracking close to 2 per cent, consistent with an economy that has been operating near capacity. CPI inflation was 1.7 per cent in November as the drag from gasoline prices more than offset the temporary effects of tariffs and past increases in minimum wages.

The Bank projects that real GDP growth will pick up in the second quarter of 2019 and average slightly above potential through the end of the projection horizon. The solid underpinnings of growth through part of 2018—including expanding foreign demand, robust immigration flows and a low unemployment rate—are expected to continue to support the Canadian economy while oil-producing regions adjust to lower oil prices. Outside the energy sector, investment and exports are anticipated to grow at a robust pace. Meanwhile, growth in household spending is expected to be softer than in 2018, primarily reflecting ongoing adjustments to the tighter mortgage guidelines and higher interest rates, and the impact of lower oil prices on real income and wealth.

Real GDP growth in 2019 has been revised down by 0.4 percentage points compared with the October Report. Developments in the energy sector and announced reductions in Ontario provincial spending 
are expected to more than offset the positive effects of the recent federal tax measures targeting investment and the impacts of the lower Canadian dollar.

Overall, business investment is anticipated to expand modestly. While spending in the energy sector is expected to contract significantly in 2019, investment growth in other sectors is anticipated to be strong.

Firms outside the energy sector are expected to increase investment over the projection horizon to alleviate capacity pressures and improve productivity. The winter Business Outlook Survey found that investment intentions remain strong. Ongoing digitalization of business activity should encourage 
capital spending in areas such as research and development, software and computer equipment. Moreover, tax measures recently announced by the federal government allow firms to write off a larger share of the cost of newly acquired assets in the year an investment is made. These tax policy 
changes should boost business investment and improve competitiveness. The signing of the CUSMA is a positive development, and investment would be even stronger without elevated uncertainty surrounding global trade policy.

In contrast, with lower oil prices, investment in the energy sector is expected to decline and be materially weaker over the projection horizon than anticipated in the October Report. Recent consultations suggest that the sentiment of firms in the sector has turned significantly negative and that a contraction in investment can be expected in 2019.

Exports are expected to grow close to 3 per cent per year over the projection horizon, a solid pace compared with recent historical experience. This outlook is supported by ongoing expansion of foreign demand, the lower Canadian dollar and rising production capacity. The implications of recent trade agreements are incorporated and are expected to increase exports. However, global trade policy uncertainty and competitiveness challenges are anticipated to continue to weigh on the outlook for overall exports while limited transportation capacity restrains the expansion of energy exports.

Growth of non-commodity exports is expected to be relatively broad-based. For instance, machinery and equipment exports should benefit from rising US business investment, and services-related exports 
are forecast to continue to expand at a strong pace amid ongoing digitalization. In contrast, auto sector exports are expected to decline over the projection horizon, reflecting changes to production mandates of Canadian motor vehicle assemblers, including the scheduled shutdown of the General Motors Oshawa plant in 2019.

Commodity exports are anticipated to expand at a moderate pace. The growth of non-energy commodity exports should continue to benefit from the global expansion. Energy exports are expected to remain steady in the near term. Once elevated inventories have been drawn down and new transportation capacity becomes available, western Canadian oil prices are more likely to remain near recent levels without production curtailments. Transportation capacity is expected to expand by about 560,000 barrels per day (bpd) by the third quarter of 2019.5 In addition, the Alberta government will expand rail capacity by about 120,000 bpd over the first three quarters of 2020. With additional transportation capacity, growth of oil production and exports is expected to increase in the second half of 2019 and continue to pick up over the projection horizon. These expansions of transportation 
capacity will boost exports, but they are not anticipated to be sufficient to meet future production.

The growth of imports is expected to slow in 2019, mainly reflecting the lower Canadian dollar and weaker domestic demand, before rebounding along with a pickup in business investment growth.

Several factors are expected to continue to underpin household spending over the projection horizon: population growth (boosted by immigration), low unemployment rates, solid wage gains and low gasoline prices. These factors will provide support while households adjust to the tighter mortgage guidelines, higher borrowing rates and the impacts of the decline in oil prices on income and wealth.

Consumption growth is projected to moderate somewhat in 2019–20 compared with 2018. This softening partly reflects the fact that, for some households, the impact of higher interest rates on consumption is lagged relative to actual changes in mortgage rates. This occurs as a result of the renewal cycle on fixed-rate mortgages. In light of downward revisions to disposable income in recent years, estimates of the savings rate are considerably lower than previously thought, suggesting the potential for some downside risks to future consumption growth. New home construction and resale activity are expected to remain relatively soft over the projection horizon as households continue to adjust to policy changes.

The outlooks for consumption and residential investment are being dampened by expected weakness in oil-producing provinces. Because of the recent fall in oil prices, income growth in these provinces is expected to continue to lag the rest of Canada. In addition, inventories of vacant new homes in these areas have risen markedly over the past several years, and this latest episode could lead to further increases.

CPI inflation is expected to ease temporarily, reaching about 11/2 per cent in the third quarter before returning to around 2 per cent by the end of 2019. Two factors are contributing to a lower inflation profile than projected in the October Report. The effects of recent declines in oil prices 
on gasoline prices are expected to push inflation down by about 0.4 percentage points through the third quarter of 2019. As well, weaker growth in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of this year leads to a widening of the output gap and some additional modest disinflationary pressure, which gradually diminish over the projection horizon. Pass-through effects of the lower Canadian dollar provide some offset to these factors.

The base-case projection provides the Bank’s view of the most likely outcome for inflation, although any projection is subject to considerable forecast uncertainty. A 90 per cent confidence band around the inflation projection widens from ±0.6 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2018 to ±1.5 percentage points by the end of 2020.

The projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. Most respondents to the Bank’s winter Business Outlook Survey anticipate that inflation will remain within the Bank’s target range of 1 to 3 per cent over the next two years. The majority 
expect inflation to be in the upper half of that range. The November 2018 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.3 per cent in 2018 and 2.1 per cent in 2019, with long-term annual inflation expectations averaging 2.0 per cent through 2028. 
	
The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks. Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. The evolution of the most important risks since October is summarized in Table 4. As in past reports, the focus is on those 
risks identified as the most important to the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks considered in the projection.
	
Trade tensions between the United States and China could worsen if current negotiations are unsuccessful, leading to more severe fallout than what is included in the projection. The largest downside risk would be a major reallocation of production, capital and labour across sectors and countries. Canadian exports and business investment could suffer from a significant weakening in foreign demand, a breakdown in global value chains, falling business confidence and lower commodity prices. At the same time, there could be inflationary pressures from the increase in global input costs associated with higher tariffs, from lower productivity and from a lower Canadian dollar.

In contrast, if the United States and China were to reach a broad agreement on trade issues, global and Canadian economic activity would be stronger than in the base-case projection. As well, the near-
term upward pressure from tariffs on prices would be removed.

Considerable uncertainty remains around the future path of Canadian oil prices and production. On the one hand, global prices could recover to above the levels assumed in the projection if market concerns about the US–China conflict were to subside. On the other hand, significant discounting of western Canadian oil prices could resume if transportation capacity were not adequately expanded.

Momentum in Canadian exports could prove more durable than assumed in the Bank’s base-case projection, especially given the lower Canadian dollar. In the context of elevated capacity pressures, sustained demand growth outside the oil sector and stronger exports could lead businesses to increase investment even more to reduce capacity pressures. In addition, ratification of the CUSMA could result in a large improvement in business sentiment, leading to stronger investment and exports than in the base-case projection. Thus, exports could grow faster than foreign demand and recover some of the global export market share lost in recent years.

GDP growth in the United States could be stronger. For instance, recent US tax and regulatory changes could boost investment and potential output by more than in the base-case projection. It is also possible that additional US fiscal stimulus measures could be enacted to avoid a sharp decline in growth in 2020. Canadian investment and exports would both benefit from stronger US activity.

Global financial conditions remain broadly accommodative but could tighten suddenly. Several triggers could lead to higher term and risk premiums. These include an escalation of trade tensions and tighter monetary conditions due to higher-than-expected rates of wage and price inflation in advanced economies. Higher bond yields in advanced economies could lead to larger capital outflows from EMEs, 
exacerbating country-specific vulnerabilities in some cases. Higher yields could also lead to a sharp tightening in corporate credit conditions in advanced economies. These developments could translate 
into a rise in debt-service burdens, a decline in activity in sectors sensitive to interest rates, lower commodity prices and weaker global and Canadian economic growth.

House prices in the Toronto area are close to 40 per cent higher than they were three years ago. In the Vancouver area, the increase has been even larger—about 50 per cent. Speculative activity has been a significant factor in the prolonged run-up in prices. Today there is less evidence of speculation in some markets, likely due to the combined impact of provincial and municipal housing measures, tightened mortgage finance guidelines and higher mortgage rates. Average prices are levelling off in Toronto, and in Vancouver they are declining modestly. Overall, house prices in Canada are now growing at an annual rate of roughly 2 per cent. Nevertheless, price levels remain elevated in the greater Vancouver and Toronto areas. Thus, there remains a risk of a sharp decline in house prices in these markets as well as in those affected by the oil price decline. Such a decline in house prices could dampen consumption, housing demand and construction activity.
	