Inflation around the world remains high and broad-based, despite falling commodity prices and evidence that supply challenges are gradually easing.

In response, many central banks have been rapidly increasing their policy rates. Global growth is slowing sharply due to the associated tightening in financial conditions worldwide, as well as the acute energy shortages and ongoing uncertainty because of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Financial stresses have increased.

The Bank of Canada has been raising its policy interest rate to slow demand growth, anchor inflation expectations and bring inflation down. Slower domestic and foreign demand, lower commodity prices and the fading impact of global supply disruptions will reduce price pressures over the projection horizon. Inflation is expected to return to the top of the 1%–3% control range by the end of 2023 and to the 2% target by the end of 2024.

Inflation has continued to rise across the world this past year, reaching highs that have not been seen for decades. Many central banks have swiftly raised their policy rates in response. Although commodity prices are well below their peak from earlier this year and inflationary pressures from supply challenges have recently subsided, underlying inflation has yet to ease in many countries. 

The tightening of global monetary and financial conditions and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are weighing on business and consumer confidence as well as on economic activity around the world. The Bank is expecting a sharp slowdown in the global economy. In the United States, growth in household spending and investment has fallen markedly. These are important drivers of demand for Canadian exports. In the euro area, economic activity is expected to have started contracting in the second half of 2022 due to energy shortages and elevated uncertainty. While economic activity in China is recovering from the most recent round of lockdowns related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the correction in China’s property sector continues to restrain growth. 

The rapid rise in US policy interest rates and the surge in the US dollar have both caused important spillovers onto global financial conditions. Debt-servicing costs for many emerging-market economies (EMEs) are increasing, with some developing economies facing challenges servicing their debt. The appreciation of the US dollar also adds to inflationary pressures in many countries. 

Overall, the Bank of Canada projects global growth to decline from roughly 3¼% in 2022 to about 1½% in 2023. This would mark the slowest rate of global growth since 1982, excluding the COVID-19 pandemic and the 2008–09 global financial crisis. Growth is projected to pick up to around 2½% in 2024, mainly as the effects of tighter monetary policy and financial conditions abate.
 
Globally, inflation is expected to decline in 2024 to levels that are close to central banks’ targets. Lower commodity prices, easing supply challenges and slower demand growth due to monetary policy tightening are expected to reduce inflation over the projection horizon.

Compared with projections in the July Report, growth in regions important for the Canadian economy—such as the United States, the euro area and China—has been revised down significantly.

Much of the world is experiencing high inflation. However, price increases have recently slowed due to declines in commodity prices. Moreover, pressures on inflation for prices of durable goods have lessened. This easing is partly due to lower transportation costs between Asia and other continents. As well, supplier delivery times are showing signs of normalizing. Despite these developments, underlying inflation remains elevated.
	
The sources and intensity of inflationary pressures differ significantly across regions.
	
In the United States, measures of near-term inflation expectations have fallen slightly but are still considerably higher than the Federal Reserve’s inflation target. Moreover, rates of job openings, separations, quits and unemployment continue to signal a tight labour market, with employment gains outpacing growth in the working-age population. Wages continue to rise rapidly. 

In the euro area, inflation is high and broadening across categories. Energy shortages are the main factor behind inflationary pressures, particularly after Russia further restricted natural gas exports. A tight labour market is also a factor, but it plays a smaller role. 
	
Elevated commodity prices have added to inflation worldwide. The appreciation of the US dollar is contributing to imported inflation in countries that have seen their currencies depreciate.

The Bank forecasts that inflation globally will decline steadily. The tightening in financial conditions plays an important role in reducing demand growth and inflation over the projection. 

Global financial conditions are markedly more restrictive than they were at the time of the July Report largely because many central banks have continued to tighten monetary policy.3 Global government bond yields have climbed quickly since the beginning of the year, leading to a repricing in global equities and other risky assets. The rapid rise in US interest rates and safe-haven flows resulting from concerns about a global recession have contributed to a substantial appreciation of the US dollar. While the Canadian dollar held steady against its US counterpart for most of the year, it has depreciated recently. The economic projection assumes the Canadian dollar will remain close to its average of around 74 cents US since September, 4 cents lower than assumed in July.

As central banks in many countries raise their policy rates to address inflationary pressures, abrupt movements in risky asset prices and increased liquidity needs could occur. Financial vulnerabilities that have been building for some time—including high indebtedness and stretched asset valuations—could magnify the impact of global tightening. Moreover, a higher US dollar could amplify funding problems faced by some EMEs that have borrowed extensively in that currency. 

Consumption growth wanes as demand for in-person services stabilizes and household budgets are squeezed by high inflation and rising interest rates. Together, the slowdown in domestic demand and tighter borrowing conditions are projected to hamper business investment and industrial production. These factors are expected to dampen US output in 2023 before growth picks up over 2024.

In the euro area, activity is forecast to contract through the first quarter of 2023. The decline is mainly driven by severe supply disruptions caused by Russian restrictions of natural gas exports and other shortages related to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Tighter monetary policy and lower confidence also dampen demand growth over the projection.

GDP is projected to grow around 3% in 2022 but to contract ½% in 2023. While a modest rebound is expected in 2024, the outlook remains highly uncertain.

As the most severe effects of pandemic-related lockdowns fade, China’s economy appears to have partially rebounded. Activity is forecast to pick up further as the manufacturing sector recovers and in-person activities gradually resume. Containment measures in China are assumed to become less frequent and more targeted over the remainder of 2022 and 2023. Ongoing challenges related to its property market will continue to weigh on growth. 

Risks to economic activity are tilted to the downside. Authorities face a delicate balancing act between supporting growth, maintaining a “zero-COVID” policy and addressing financial vulnerabilities. 

Economic growth in oil-importing EMEs and the rest-of-the-world group is subdued and expected to remain so over the projection horizon. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and tight financial conditions have created headwinds in both regions. Some emerging markets have experienced capital outflows—particularly those with weaker macroeconomic fundamentals. The appreciation of the US dollar also risks creating additional issues for debt sustainability in countries with significant debt denominated in US dollars. The moderation in growth that began in 2022 is expected to continue through 2023. In 2024, growth is projected to rise as the effects of headwinds dissipate.

Prices for Brent oil have declined since the July Report. Falling economic growth worldwide, due in part to tighter monetary policy globally and softening demand in China, has contributed to the decline in prices. These factors are outweighing the effects of the recent decision by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some non-OPEC oil producers (OPEC+) to cut oil production.
	
Looking ahead, the Bank assumes that prices for Brent oil will stay near current levels. Prices for West Texas Intermediate and Western Canadian Select are assumed to be US$5 and US$20 below Brent prices, respectively.

Natural gas prices are below those at the time of the July Report, and they have become more volatile. Russia’s threat to cut off gas supplies to Europe this coming winter led to a price spike in that region. European prices then fell after gas storage facilities were filled ahead of schedule. Movements in European prices have had spillovers onto prices in Asia and, to a lesser extent, North America.

Since the July Report, the Bank’s non-energy commodity price index has declined by roughly 5%. The largest drop was in forestry prices, due to slowing housing activity in North America. Agricultural prices have eased as a number of regions have reported bumper harvests and war-related disruptions have had a smaller effect than first projected. 
	
The rise in inflation in Canada through 2022 has been pronounced and has broadened over time. Demand for goods and, in particular, services has outpaced supply, and measures of core inflation continue to be elevated. Household and business expectations for inflation over the next two years remain high. The longer high inflation lasts and the more pervasive it becomes, the greater the risk that it becomes entrenched.

To lower inflation, the Bank of Canada rapidly raised its policy rate and is undertaking quantitative tightening. These actions, combined with interest rate increases by the US Federal Reserve and other central banks, have led to a rapid tightening in domestic financial conditions over the past year. As a result, economic growth in Canada is slowing, allowing supply to catch up with demand. Housing activity has fallen sharply from the exceptional peak recorded earlier this year. Household spending on goods is slowing, and firms’ plans for investment and hiring are softening. The slowdown in economic activity abroad, particularly in the United States, has also begun to weigh on exports. Over the projection, the weaker Canadian dollar is expected to offset some of the impact on exports coming from slowing foreign demand.  

Economic growth is forecast to slow from 3¼% in 2022 to just under 1% in 2023. It picks up to 2% in 2024 as the impact of higher interest rates on Canadian growth fades, potential output growth picks up and foreign demand stabilizes.

Inflation has declined since June, primarily due to lower gasoline prices. It continues to decrease over the projection horizon, reaching around 3% by the end of 2023 and returning to the 2% target by the end of 2024. The decrease in inflation occurs as higher interest rates in Canada and abroad continue to work their way through the economy and the impact of global supply disruptions fades.
	
At 6.9% in September, inflation in Canada was well above the Bank’s target. Inflation is broad-based, with almost two-thirds of the components of the consumer price index (CPI) showing price increases of greater than 5% over the past year. For example, food price inflation and services price inflation have been high.

However, due to falling gasoline prices, inflation has been declining from its 8.1% peak in June. Prices for agricultural products have also tapered off, as have the inflationary pressures from global supply bottlenecks. These forces are expected to pass through to lower food and goods price inflation in the months ahead.  

In Canada, the demand for goods and services is outpacing the economy’s ability to supply them. Businesses continue to report widespread labour shortages. And strong demand has led to a sharp rise in the prices of services. 

This strong and persistent demand is reflected in the Bank’s measures of core inflation. CPI-median and CPI-trim are currently at 4.7% and 5.2%, respectively.

Inflation is typically reported on a year-over-year basis to smooth out some of the fluctuations that occur in higher-frequency measures. However, movements over a 12-month period do not provide as timely an assessment of inflationary pressures as those measures that focus on the most recent data do. Three-month measures of inflation are both more timely and more volatile than year-over-year measures. 

Largely due to the drop in gasoline prices, 3-month CPI inflation has fallen sharply and is now well below the year-over-year measure. Measures of 3-month core inflation point to a slowdown to around 4%. This reflects fewer near-term price pressures from durable goods and shelter. At the same time, however, food price inflation and services price inflation (excluding shelter) have been showing strong momentum.

Although 3-month measures of core inflation point to a lower level of underlying inflation than the year-over-year measure, their levels remain well above target. To see a clear decline in underlying inflation, a more sustained further decrease in the 3-month measures would be required. 

Most respondents to consumer and business surveys expect average CPI inflation over the next two years to be well above the 2% target. The distribution of survey responses remains markedly wider than before the pandemic, suggesting that the level of uncertainty about the future path of inflation over the next few years is still high. Moreover, more respondents 
expect inflation to be above target than below. At the same time, long-term expectations for CPI inflation—particularly those gathered from surveys of professional forecasters and measures based on financial markets—remain consistent with the 2% target. This indicates that longer-term expectations remain well anchored.

Recent dynamics are mixed. Consumers’ short-term CPI inflation expectations have continued to edge higher, driven by concerns about supply chain disruptions and oil prices. In contrast, the results of the Business Outlook Survey (BOS) for the third quarter of 2022 suggest that firms’ short-term CPI inflation expectations have eased slightly. The share of firms expecting very large price increases has moderated. 

When it comes to expectations of their own input cost pressures and pricing, firms see inflation slowing. For the first time since mid-2020, firms now expect that cost and pricing pressures will be less intense than they were over the past 12 months.

The strong labour market and persistent capacity constraints indicate that there is still substantial excess demand in the Canadian economy. The labour market continues to be tight across a broad range of measures, suggesting that it has surpassed maximum sustainable employment. The unemployment rate in September was 5.2%, one of the lowest rates in 40 years. A historically high number of firms responding to the BOS stated that they are facing more intense labour shortages than they were a year ago. The ratios of vacancies and job postings to unemployed workers also remain close to their all-time highs. Over the last six months, wage growth has increased and broadened across sectors.

Employment, however, has been softening in recent months, particularly in some sectors that are sensitive to interest rates, such as manufacturing and construction. This moderation also reflects an overall decline in the labour force participation rate since the beginning of the year, partly due to the increased number of retirements. 

Capacity constraints remain significant. Results from recent business surveys suggest that supply chain bottlenecks persist. In the BOS, firms report some reductions in lead times and increases in the availability of materials.

The Bank estimates that the output gap was between 0.25% and 1.25% in the third quarter of 2022, similar to the estimate for the second quarter.

Growth was robust in the first half of 2022 as the Canadian economy reopened. High commodity prices and the easing of public health restrictions were boosting economic activity. 

In the spring, rising mortgage rates contributed to a sharp slowing of housing resales, and, by the middle of the year, economic activity started showing signs of moderation. Growth is estimated to have eased to around 1½% in the third quarter. GDP growth is then projected to slow to between 0% and ½% through the end of 2022 and the first half of 2023. 
This suggests that a couple of quarters with growth slightly below zero is just as likely as a couple of quarters with small positive growth. 

The slowdown reflects tighter financial conditions that are weighing heavily on household demand and business investment. As the boost from pent-up demand for in-person services fades, consumption growth softens. Weaker foreign demand, particularly in the United States, leads to a decline in export growth. The recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar partially offsets this impact.

Starting in the second half of 2023, GDP growth picks up as the effect of interest rate increases subsides and potential output recovers. Robust immigration also supports a pickup in housing demand in 2024. Quarterly growth in exports increases following a resumption of economic growth in the United States. 

Growth in potential output rises from around ¾% in 2022 to about 2% in 2023 and 2024. Record immigration, fewer supply chain issues and easing of other pandemic-related factors, such as public health measures, support potential output growth.

With soft demand growth and solid potential output growth, excess demand in the Canadian economy turns into excess supply in early 2023. 

Household spending is expected to contract modestly in the fourth quarter of 2022 and through the first half of 2023. Higher interest rates weigh on household spending, with housing and big-ticket items being the most affected. Decreasing house prices, financial wealth and consumer confidence also restrain household spending. 

Borrowing costs have risen sharply. The costs for those taking on a new mortgage are up markedly. Households renewing an existing mortgage are facing a larger increase than has been experienced during any tightening cycle over the past 30 years. For example, a homeowner who signed a five-year fixed-rate mortgage in October 2017 would now be faced with a mortgage rate that is 1½ to 2 percentage points higher at renewal.  

The rise in mortgage rates contributed to a sharp pullback in resales beginning in March. Resales have continued to decline and are now below pre-pandemic levels. Renovation activity has also weakened. The contraction in residential investment that began in the second quarter of the year is projected to continue through the first half of 2023, although to a lesser degree. House prices, which rose by just over 50% between February 2020 and February 2022, have declined by just under 10%.4 They are projected to continue to decline, particularly in those markets that saw larger increases during the pandemic.

Higher borrowing costs are affecting spending on big-ticket items. Spending on automobiles, furniture and appliances is the most sensitive to interest rates and is already showing signs of slowing. As higher interest rates work their way through the economy, disposable income growth and the demand for services will also slow. Past experience suggests that the demand for travel, hotels, meals at restaurants and communications services will be impacted the most. 

Household spending strengthens beginning in the second half of 2023 and extends through 2024. Population growth and rising disposable incomes support demand as the impact of the tightening in financial conditions wanes. For example, new residential construction is boosted by strong immigration in markets that are already particularly tight.

Business investment growth is projected to slow markedly from about 6¾% in 2022 to around 1½% in 2023 before increasing modestly to 2¼% in 2024.

According to results of the BOS, investment intentions are positive partly because capacity constraints remain significant for many businesses. In 2023, growth in business investment spending is expected to slow due to higher financing costs, softening demand and moderating capacity constraints. 

Rising bank lending rates, widening corporate spreads and falling equity markets have contributed to substantial increases in financing costs for many businesses. For example, the average borrowing rate for new business loans has risen by about 3 percentage points over the past year. The recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar, which makes investment in machinery and equipment more expensive, also weighs on business investment. 

Growth picks up in 2024 when demand strengthens across the economy. Projects such as the development of electric vehicle production facilities also contribute to the uptick.

Investment growth in the oil and gas sector is anticipated to be solid due to relatively high energy prices. However, investment will be restrained by ongoing uncertainty about long-term demand and the transition to a low-carbon economy.

Inventory investment is projected to moderate in 2023 following exceptional strength. The easing in global supply chain disruptions will gradually help efforts to restock, particularly by retailers, following pandemic-related shortages. Firms are assumed to hold more inventories to buffer themselves against future supply disruptions and build resilience in their production chains.

Exports grow moderately over the projection horizon. Growth of non-commodity exports through 2023 slows because of weakening foreign demand. The recovery in international travel, the continued easing of global supply chain disruptions and the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar provide a partial offset. As foreign demand stabilizes through 2024, non-commodity exports gradually strengthen.

Non-energy commodity exports grow moderately in 2023, partly reflecting the anticipated return of crop yields to normal levels as well as fewer effects from global supply chain disruptions.

Over the projection horizon, energy exports are supported by high prices and increased transportation capacity. In 2024, growth should pick up due to the expected completion of key projects such as the Trans Mountain Expansion pipeline. 

A gradual recovery in business investment spending and ongoing restocking by firms will support imports of goods. 

CPI inflation is forecast to decline from around 7% in the fourth quarter of 2022 to within the 1%–3% target range by the end of 2023 and to return to the 2% target by the end of 2024. Inflation falls as the effects of past increases in commodity prices dissipate and the inflationary pressures from global supply disruptions fade. Other factors are also expected to ease. These potentially include the pass-through of elevated energy costs to the prices of other goods and services as well as elevated shelter costs. Specifically, high energy costs seem to have passed through to inflation much more than is usual. It will take some time for these unusually large impacts to fully recede.

The rise in interest rates slows spending, reduces demand and helps return inflation back to target. In particular, moderating demand leads to a softening of inflation of services prices. This includes lower house prices and declining shelter price inflation through mid-2023. Shelter price inflation, however, remains positive due to the lasting effect of increased mortgage interest costs and strong growth in rent.

The global economy faces a growing set of complex challenges and risks. In most countries, inflation remains high and widespread. Many central banks have rapidly raised interest rates, and some have begun to shrink their balance sheets. Financial conditions have tightened sharply in 2022, increasing financial stresses. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and rising geopolitical tensions remain major sources of uncertainty. 

Some of the risks identified in previous issues of the Report have been partially incorporated into the projection. The base-case scenario includes weaker global growth, lower commodity prices and transportation costs, tighter global financial conditions and a sharper near-term decline in Canadian housing activity.

The Bank sees two main risks to the outlook for inflation. On the upside, inflation may remain higher for longer than anticipated in the base case. One way this could occur is if inflation expectations do not adjust downward as expected. In this case, the wage-price spiral risk scenario described in the July Report could be realized. Other factors could also lead to stickier inflation than projected in the base case. On the downside, the slowdown in the global economy could be even more severe and inflation would fall further than projected.

While the Bank views the risks around its inflation outlook as roughly balanced, the upside risk is of greater concern because inflation is persistently high.

Inflation could persist at a rate higher than expected in the base case. This risk could arise through either global or domestic channels.
 
Some global factors responsible for recent high inflation could last longer than assumed in the base case or have a greater impact on consumer prices than anticipated. For example, an intensification of the supply disruptions related to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine could trigger spikes in the prices of oil, natural gas and agricultural products. More broadly, an increase in geopolitical tensions could prolong disruptions to supply chains, risking higher prices on internationally traded goods. 

Domestic factors could also keep inflation high for longer than anticipated. Short-term inflation expectations have increased considerably since the onset of the pandemic. If these expectations prove to be more persistent than anticipated in the base case, inflation will remain higher for longer. 

Another risk is that households may tap into their elevated levels of savings more than anticipated in the base case. This would lead to increased household spending and greater upward pressure on inflation. 

As monetary policy tightens in many countries, long-standing global financial vulnerabilities could amplify the impacts on the global economy. Many countries have high levels of sovereign, non-financial corporate and household debt. Significant external and US-dollar borrowing is an additional vulnerability for several EMEs. Some funding markets have become more fragile due to lower levels of liquidity. An abrupt repricing of risk could trigger funding strains for higher-risk borrowers and a prolonged period of deleveraging. The result could lead to a more severe global slowdown and lower commodity prices. 

The Canadian economy could be affected through weaker foreign demand, lower terms of trade and spillovers into its financial system. The resulting tighter financial conditions and higher unemployment could undermine homebuyer sentiment and lead to a larger-than-expected drop in house prices. This in turn could reduce household wealth, access to credit and consumer confidence.

The base case assumes that the spike in goods prices since the beginning of the pandemic will persist. These prices could decline, however, if the slowdown in global growth proves to be more severe than anticipated. A sharper slowdown in growth, notably in the United States, could push down goods prices if retailers who find themselves with too much inventory offer deep discounts. 
	