The global economy is slowing but has been more robust than anticipated in the October Report, in large part due to the surprising strength of the US economy. Growth is expected to moderate further in 2024. Inflation is coming down in most major economies and is expected to continue to decline gradually toward central banks’ targets. 

In Canada, consumer price index (CPI) inflation is still too high but is easing gradually. Recent data reinforce that monetary policy is working to moderate spending and relieve price pressures across a wider range of goods and services. However, shelter price inflation is high and is expected to put upward pressure on inflation for some time. 

Economic growth stalled in Canada in the middle of 2023. Given this weakness, supply has caught up with demand, and the economy now looks to be in modest excess supply. Labour market conditions have also eased, with more indicators signalling an improved balance between labour supply and demand. However, wage growth is still around 4% to 5%. 

In 2024, economic activity is forecast to remain weak in the first quarter and then to pick up gradually, with annual growth in gross domestic product (GDP) just under 1%. Past interest rate increases will continue to constrain household spending and business investment, while weak foreign demand will slow export growth. Spending by governments contributes materially to growth through 2024. GDP growth is projected to rise to about 2½% in 2025. 

Inflation is projected to stay around 3% through the first half of 2024. As excess supply in the economy weighs on prices, inflation is forecast to ease to 2½% in the second half of 2024 and to return to target in 2025. 

While the economy is evolving largely as projected in the October Report, considerable uncertainty remains. Overall, the risks to the outlook for inflation appear balanced. Given that inflation is still above 3% and underlying inflation is proving persistent, the Bank of Canada remains concerned that upside risks could materialize and cause inflation to remain above the target for longer than expected.
	
Inflation is easing across most economies and across a widening range of goods and services. With slowing growth, inflation rates in most advanced economies are expected to come down slowly and reach central bank targets in 2025. The pace of disinflation is gradual because prices for services—including shelter—are still increasing at an elevated rate in many economies.

Global growth slowed in 2023 but has been stronger than anticipated at this time last year, partly because of unexpected strength in the US economy. US consumption has been strong, supported by resilient employment growth and households continuing to spend savings they accumulated during the COVID-19 pandemic. Since the October Report, the outlook for the US  economy has been revised up again.

Nevertheless, global growth is expected to slow further in 2024. In the United States, this is due to a slowdown in consumption as households continue to adjust to past increases in interest rates and have less pandemic-era savings. Ongoing structural and policy challenges should restrain activity in China. Modest economic growth is expected in the euro area. Global growth strengthens in 2025 as the impacts of past monetary tightening fade and financial conditions ease. 

Inflation is easing across a growing range of goods and services around the world. Inflation in prices for core goods continues to decline in the United States and the euro area. This is due to past improvements in supply chains and the shift in spending away from goods toward services. Past increases in policy rates are also playing an important role. The decrease in inflation has been most apparent in durable goods, the demand for which tends to be more sensitive to changes in interest rates.

Further declines in inflation in core goods prices are expected in the United States and the euro area as demand weakens. Goods price inflation in the euro area also slows due to fading cost pressures from past energy disruptions and less pressure on import prices—partly reflecting falling producer prices in China. However, further disruptions to trade through the Red Sea could reverse some of the downward pressure on inflation that has come from improvements in supply chains.

Inflation in prices for core services, including shelter, remains elevated but has also been falling gradually. This decline is expected to continue in 2024. In the United States, inflation in prices for core services excluding shelter is expected to moderate as monetary policy constrains demand and labour market conditions ease. Wage growth is expected to slow while productivity growth remains solid. Shelter price inflation is projected to ease from an elevated rate due to the delayed effect from slower growth in rental prices for new tenants. 

In the euro area, inflation in services prices is receding, as pent-up demand from the pandemic has faded and monetary policy weighs on demand. Nevertheless, some cost pressures linger as wage growth remains elevated despite slow productivity growth.

The recent fall in energy prices is also projected to generate some ongoing downward pressure on headline inflation in the coming months. Overall, inflation returns sustainably to target in the United States and the euro area in 2025.

The sharp tightening in financial conditions experienced before the October Report has dissipated, led by declines in yields on long-term government bonds. Two main factors have contributed to these declines. First, the term premium is estimated to have fallen, as markets perceive fewer risks to the outlook for growth and inflation. Second, real yields have decreased as markets have also revised down their expectations for policy rates. As a result of these factors, nominal yields on 10-year US government bonds have fallen by around 75 basis points (bps) since the October Report. This has contributed to declines in corporate borrowing rates and the interest rates on household mortgages.

Credit conditions have also shown signs of easing. Issuance of US corporate bonds has been robust, and credit spreads have narrowed. Moreover, US equity prices have rebounded strongly. 

The Canadian dollar has remained close to the level observed at the time of the October Report.

Economic growth in the United States is expected to slow in 2024. Growth in consumer spending moderates in the near term as spending of accumulated savings no longer offsets the effects of past increases in borrowing costs. Moreover, banks have become less willing to lend money to consumers, and labour income growth is projected to slow. Softening consumer demand and still-elevated corporate borrowing rates are also projected to weaken US business investment. Moreover, government spending is not expected to support growth in 2024 to the extent that it did in 2023. 

Private domestic demand leads a modest pickup in quarterly growth in the United States starting in late 2024 as the impacts of past monetary tightening fade and financial conditions ease.

China’s economy is expected to grow between 4% and 5% over the projection horizon. Ongoing issues in the property sector as well as policy uncertainty and weak consumer confidence continue to restrain activity.

Growth in the euro area remains modest. Past interest rate increases are acting as a drag on demand. In addition, foreign demand is subdued, and factors such as the strength of the euro and comparatively high energy costs have eroded competitiveness and are hampering growth. Growth is projected to pick up gradually over 2024 and 2025 as the effects of energy shortages fade and monetary policy becomes less restrictive.

The price of Brent oil is close to US$80, considerably lower than the assumption of US$90 in the October Report. The decline reflects a combination of better-than-expected conditions for supply and weaker-than-anticipated demand for oil. 

The risk premium in oil prices has declined, reflecting the market’s assessment that the war in Israel and Gaza is less likely to have a negative impact on global oil supply. Moreover, oil production in countries that are not members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries has expanded faster than anticipated in recent months, led by the United States, Brazil and Guyana. Global demand for oil has moderated more than expected due to the slowdown in global manufacturing activity and an easing in demand growth for transportation fuels. 

The Bank of Canada’s Commodity Price Index excluding energy has been flat since the October Report, with strengthening lumber prices offset by weakness in other commodities.

CPI inflation continued to ease, reaching 3.3% in the fourth quarter of 2023. Since the October Report, data have provided further evidence that monetary policy is working as expected to slow growth and eliminate excess demand pressures on inflation. However, inflation remains too high, with persistent strength in shelter and food price inflation. 

Economic growth is anticipated to remain close to zero through the first quarter of 2024. It is then expected to pick up gradually as the effects of past interest rate increases on growth begin to fade and the recent easing in financial conditions supports demand. Inflation is expected to remain close to 3% over the first half of 2024 before easing gradually and returning to the 2% target in 2025. 

Despite significant progress since the summer of 2022, considerable uncertainty remains about the pace of future decreases in inflation. While the slowdown in the economy is anticipated to reduce inflationary pressures, other forces could keep inflation above the target for longer than expected.

Economic growth is estimated to have stalled since the middle of 2023. Past interest rate increases continue to weigh on household spending and business investment, and slowing foreign demand has restrained exports. Temporary factors, such as the Quebec public sector strikes, also impact growth in the near term. In the first quarter of 2024, growth is expected to remain close to zero. 

Consumption per capita has declined and will likely continue to contract in the near term. It has been particularly weak for goods and services that are sensitive to interest rates, such as furniture, restaurants and accommodations. Some of this weakness has been offset by the recovery in travel spending and by strength in motor vehicle sales due to increased product availability. Housing resale activity has also been weak, and house prices fell in the fourth quarter. However, new construction activity has picked up, responding to increased demand from strong population growth. 
	
Financial conditions have eased for Canadian households and businesses since the October Report, even though policy interest rates remain elevated. Long-term government bond yields have fallen. Bank funding costs have also gone down, and financial institutions have subsequently lowered their interest rates for mortgages. For example, five-year fixed mortgage rates have fallen by about 65 basis points since mid-October 2023. Equity prices have risen, and corporate credit spreads have also narrowed.
 
However, elevated borrowing costs have weighed on household and business credit growth over the past year. The Senior Loan Officer Survey for the third quarter of 2023 also reported an overall tightening in business lending conditions. Measures of household financial stress have continued to edge up in recent months. Delinquency rates are rising. Those for mortgages remain low compared with pre-pandemic levels, while those for other debt products are the same or have increased. 

Demand growth has stalled since the middle of 2023 amid rising supply, and the economy is judged to have moved into modest excess supply.

The output gap is estimated to have fallen to between -0.25% and -1.25% in the fourth quarter of 2023. This is broadly in line with evidence from the Bank’s Business Outlook Survey that businesses are in a better position than they were a year ago to deal with an unexpected increase in demand.

Labour market conditions have eased further. The job vacancy rate has declined to near pre-pandemic levels, and job creation has been slower than the pace implied by population growth. The unemployment rate has risen modestly to 5.8% from 5.5% last summer. Respondents to the Bank’s business surveys reported that labour shortages have declined and are close to their historical averages. In contrast, wage growth is still elevated at around 4% to 5%. Overall, the evidence suggests that labour supply and demand are better balanced. 

CPI inflation declined from 8.1% in June 2022 to 3.4% in December 2023. The initial decreases were largely due to falling energy prices and improvements in global supply chains. Evidence continues to mount that the slowing economy is leading to lower price pressures across a broad range of goods and services. 

Despite this progress, CPI inflation is still too high. Shelter service price inflation remains elevated at close to 7% due to rising mortgage interest costs and strong growth in rent. Food price inflation has declined from its peak but is still around 5%. Inflation in services excluding shelter has fallen significantly. However, the decline is far less pronounced when each month’s most volatile prices are removed. This suggests that underlying pressures on services prices could persist.

Core inflation has remained elevated in the range of 3½% to 4% on a year-over-year basis. The three-month rates are also in this range. Alternative measures of core inflation have shown mixed results since the October Report. While CPIX has eased to about 2½%, CPI excluding food and energy has ticked up to around 3½%.

The share of CPI components growing above 3% has declined since the October Report, but the decrease was entirely in the prices of goods. In contrast, the share of services components growing above 3% has increased recently.

As inflation eases toward the 2% target, inflation expectations are anticipated to decline, businesses’ pricing behaviour to normalize further and wage growth to moderate. While progress has been made, it is uneven across these inflation indicators. 

Businesses are returning toward their pre-pandemic pricing behaviours. The share of businesses expecting to increase their prices more often than normal has declined over the last four quarters, as has the share of businesses that anticipate posting larger-than-normal price increases.

Near-term inflation expectations of businesses and households have also come down, but only very modestly. Results from the Business Outlook Survey for the fourth quarter of 2023 indicate that businesses’ inflation expectations for the next two years have eased, but still average between 3% and 3½%.3 Consumers’ near-term inflation expectations have not declined significantly.4 In addition, the distribution of inflation expectations remains wider than it was before the pandemic. This suggests elevated uncertainty about the path of inflation over the next few years. Long-term expectations remain consistent with the 2% target.

Economic growth is expected to be modest in 2024, largely unchanged from the October Report. The effects of past interest rate increases continue to restrain consumption and business investment. In addition, soft foreign demand will weigh on exports through the rest of the year. Spending by governments contributes materially to growth through 2024. While strong population growth props up overall economic activity, GDP per capita is expected to continue declining over the near term.

With demand continuing to grow more slowly than potential output, excess supply in the economy is projected to increase through the first half of 2024.

Growth is expected to pick up around the middle of 2024, rising to about 2½% in 2025. Household spending strengthens as the dampening effects of monetary policy tightening on growth fade, financial conditions ease and confidence improves. Exports and business investment are supported by the recovery in foreign demand.

Growth in consumption is expected to remain weak until the end of 2024. While consumption is supported by strong population growth, on a per capita basis it is projected to continue declining through 2024. This is partly due to slow growth in labour income as the labour market eases further. In addition, consumer spending is held back by high debt-servicing costs and weak consumer confidence. Responses to the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations for the fourth quarter of 2023 indicate that households are cutting back on their spending and delaying purchases. Spending on most major purchases remains muted, especially for durable goods, which are more likely to be purchased on credit.

In 2025, consumer spending is expected to recover as income growth improves and the drag from high debt-servicing costs gradually declines. This decline is the net result of two opposing factors. 
	
For some time, households are expected to face higher interest rate payments when renewing their mortgages. The impact of the increases are anticipated to become smaller as mortgage rates gradually ease. 
	
However, some variable-rate mortgage holders with fixed payments will need to reset their amortization schedules and their required payments to catch up on their principal payments.  

Residential investment is expected to pick up in early 2024. The boost to new construction comes from strong population growth, the recent easing in financial conditions and the waning effects of past increases in interest rates. Resale activity is projected to increase from its current low levels. House price growth is expected to be moderate over the projection horizon.
 
Business investment is expected to remain weak through the first half of 2024, held back by slow demand and still-elevated borrowing costs. It is anticipated to pick up in the second half of 2024 with the diminishing impact of past interest rate increases as well as easing financial conditions and improving demand.

Export growth is expected to remain modest over the near term due to soft foreign demand for non-commodity exports. Plant shutdowns and retooling in the auto sector will also likely continue to affect motor vehicle exports through most of 2024. Nevertheless, overall, exports are anticipated to increase in the second half of the year—foreign demand will likely improve, and capacity for energy transportation will increase following the completion of the Trans Mountain Expansion project. 

Growth in imports will likely remain muted through the first half of 2024. It is expected to pick up in the second half of 2024 and 2025 due to strengthening domestic demand.

CPI inflation is expected to remain close to 3% over the first half of 2024. Elevated shelter price inflation and food price inflation are contributing to keep the level of inflation high.
 
Some components of inflation are expected to ease. For example, inflation in prices for goods excluding food and energy is projected to slow as excess supply deepens and inflation expectations decline. Food price inflation also slows because of lower global prices for agricultural products. More broadly, slowing growth in input costs is expected to lead to lower inflation for many other goods, including non-durables. Most businesses interviewed in the Business Outlook Survey expect input price growth to ease over the next 12 months.

In contrast, inflation in prices for services excluding shelter is anticipated to pick up modestly over the near term, largely due to less downward pressure from telecommunications prices.

As projected in the October Report, inflation is expected to decline to around 2½% in the second half of 2024 and then return to the target in 2025. Over the projection horizon, ongoing excess supply in the economy continues to weigh on prices, and corporate pricing behaviour and inflation expectations gradually return to normal. Wage growth is expected to slow, falling closer in line with inflation and modest productivity growth. 

Shelter price inflation remains elevated for some time. Growth in mortgage interest costs remains high as households continue to face higher rates at renewal and new mortgages are issued at rates above the average of the existing stock. Nevertheless, inflation in mortgage interest costs slows gradually as financial conditions ease and the impact of additional households renewing and taking on new mortgages decreases. Rental price inflation is supported by strong demand for housing and tight supply. However, rental price inflation is also expected to moderate due to a slowdown in population growth and an expected increase in new housing construction. House prices are expected to contribute only modestly to overall shelter price inflation.

The Bank considers the outlook in the base-case scenario to be the most likely outcome for inflation. The Bank sees both upside and downside risks to this outlook. With inflation still above 3% and not expected to return to the 2% target for more than a year, the Bank remains particularly concerned about the upside risks. 

There are two broad types of upside risk: inflation could stall materially above 2%, or new developments could lead to renewed inflationary pressures.

First, inflation expectations have come down only very modestly over the past few quarters. If households and businesses continue to expect inflation to stay elevated, this could impede the pace at which price and wage growth moderate.

Second, wages have been increasing at a fast pace relative to productivity growth. On average, consumers’ real wages are higher than they were in 2019. Productivity growth is effectively stalled and wages are still rising robustly. Because of this, the Bank remains concerned that cost pressures could add to inflation.

Third, house prices could also rise more than anticipated. This would increase inflation by raising shelter costs. While the base case includes a modest increase in house prices, this forecast is subject to a high degree of uncertainty. This risk could materialize if easing financial conditions lead to stronger-than-expected demand for housing while supply remains constrained. 

The conflict in Israel and Gaza and attacks on ships in the Red Sea are affecting seaborne trade in the region and could push oil prices and shipping costs higher. So far, global disruptions from these developments have been contained. But if the conflict were to spread further, oil prices could rise sharply and the prices for traded goods could also increase significantly. 

As in the October Report, the main downside risk to inflation is a slowdown in the Canadian economy that is more pronounced than expected. Slowing could occur through two main channels. 

First, monetary policy could have a greater impact than in the base case. Many Canadians are facing upcoming mortgage renewals and record-high levels of household debt. They could become more cautious and cut back consumption spending more than projected. This could also lead to a larger-than-expected slowdown in business investment and hiring. 

Second, global activity could be weaker than in the base case. This risk could materialize if central banks in the United States or the euro area need to keep monetary policy tighter than expected to bring inflation back to target. In China, high debt levels of local governments and challenges in the property sector could further limit growth. This could lead to weaker global demand, which may reduce prices for commodities and tradable goods.

Canadian economic growth and inflation would both be pulled down if these risks were to materialize.