
The Canadian economy has strong momentum, and employment is robust. While COVID‑19 continues to affect people’s health and the economy, high vaccination rates are lessening severe impacts. Household consumption spending is strengthening as most public health containment measures are being lifted, and exports are expected to benefit from solid foreign demand.

The unprovoked Russian invasion of Ukraine is causing enormous human suffering and has introduced significant uncertainty to the outlook for the global economy. The effects of the war are weighing on global activity and have resulted in greater volatility in financial markets. The war has also pushed commodity prices higher and further disrupted supply chains.

As a result, inflation has increased in most economies, including Canada’s. Energy and food prices continue to rise, and ongoing supply constraints are interacting with robust demand to put upward pressure on a broadening range of prices. 

Russia’s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine is taking a tragic human toll. It is also disrupting the global economic recovery just as most economies are emerging from the impact of the Omicron variant of COVID‑19. The war has exacerbated global supply shortages by restricting global transportation and imports of products from both Ukraine and Russia. Consequently, the prices of oil, grains and other commodities have risen sharply, and financial volatility 
has increased.

The global outlook has been downgraded from the January Report. Revisions are pronounced for oil-importing economies and regions with closer trade ties to Russia and Ukraine, particularly Eastern Europe and, to a lesser extent, the euro area. The US outlook has also been revised down due largely to the anticipated tightening of monetary policy in response to higher-
than-expected inflation.

Global growth is projected to moderate from about 7% in 2021 to 3½% in 2022 and 2½% in 2023. This should occur as the bounce back in activity from the acute phase of the pandemic wanes and the Russia–Ukraine conflict weighs on the outlook. The Bank expects global growth to strengthen to 3¼% in 2024 once the war’s initial impact on growth subsides.

Inflation continued to rise in the first quarter and remains high in most regions, with strong positive contributions from energy and food prices. Robust demand for goods and widespread supply shortages also remain important sources of inflationary pressure globally.

Russia and Ukraine are significant exporters of commodities. Market concerns about supply disruptions caused by the war in Ukraine have led to a sharp rise in most commodity prices.

Oil prices have been volatile since the January Report. Before Russia’s invasion, oil prices were already rising because oil demand was outpacing the growth in supply. The Russian invasion led to sharply higher prices, with the daily price of Brent crude oil peaking at nearly US$130 a barrel in early March. The Brent oil price has since fallen to around US$105 as the scope of sanctions on Russian oil has become clearer and the United States and other 
countries announced large releases of their strategic petroleum reserves. The recent COVID‑19 outbreak in China has also raised concerns about the strength of oil demand.

The Bank assumes that the price of Brent crude oil will fall from US$105 per barrel in the second quarter of 2022 to about US$90 at the end of 2024. West Texas Intermediate and Western Canadian Select crude oil prices are assumed to follow similar patterns, remaining US$5 and US$15, respectively, below Brent prices. This profile assumes that the war’s impact on oil prices diminishes over time and is broadly consistent with market expectations. 

Uncertainty around the assumed outlook for oil prices is particularly high. Prices could rise further if Russian oil exports are weaker than expected or if global oil production does not increase enough to meet demand. A resolution of the conflict in Ukraine, a rapid increase in global production or a drop in oil consumption could lead to a faster decline in prices.

The Bank’s non-energy commodity price index has increased by about 10% since the January Report. The increase in prices of base metals and agricultural commodities mainly reflects the supply disruptions caused by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. While unchanged relative to the January Report, lumber prices remain high because of strong housing demand in North America and continued transportation bottlenecks. Markets expect non-energy commodity prices to remain elevated over the projection horizon because of uncertain supply from Russia and Ukraine as well as strong global demand.

Financial conditions have tightened since the January Report, mainly as a result of higher current and expected interest rates in many regions. Increased uncertainty about the impact of the war in Ukraine has also led to more volatility in the prices of many financial assets. In early March, in response to the invasion of Ukraine, corporate credit spreads widened and most equity price indexes dropped sharply. Credit spreads and equity prices have returned to near pre-war levels in most regions. Canadian equity indexes have outperformed those of other countries due to their high exposure to energy and other commodities. The Canadian dollar has been relatively stable against the US dollar despite rising commodity prices.

Expectations of higher inflation and tighter monetary policy have pushed up yields of government bonds globally, in particular for short-term bonds. This has narrowed the spread between long- and short-term government bond yields in North America.

US domestic demand has been growing at a robust pace. Job gains remain strong amid a tight labour market. Nominal wage growth continues to be vigorous, but high inflation is eliminating gains in real compensation.

US gross domestic product (GDP) is forecast to expand by 2¾% in 2022, well above the estimated rate of potential output growth. Because the United States is a net exporter of petroleum products and has limited trade exposure to Russia and Ukraine, the war should have only a modest negative impact on growth. Consumption is anticipated to rise at a healthy pace, supported by employment growth and some household spending of the savings accumulated during the pandemic. Solid private domestic demand should also drive robust business investment growth. Recent increases in mortgage rates are, however, expected to dampen growth in residential investment. GDP growth is projected to moderate to about 2% in 2023 and 1½% in 2024 as US authorities withdraw fiscal and monetary policy stimulus.

Total and core measures of US personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation have continued to increase and are at their highest levels in nearly 40 years. Large increases in energy prices as well as supply constraints amid high demand for goods continue to be important contributors to inflationary pressures. Relative to the January Report, delivery times have shortened modestly, and order backlogs are slowly being cleared. However, shipping and input costs remain high. The war is expected to exacerbate pressures on supply chains and put additional upward pressure on inflation in the near term. In the projection, the Bank assumes that supply challenges continue to ease but persist until mid‑2023. Inflation is projected to start decreasing in the third quarter but is expected to stay above 2% over the projection horizon as the economy remains in excess demand.
	
In response to strong inflationary pressures, the Federal Reserve raised the federal funds rate by 25 basis points in March. It also announced that additional increases will be needed and that it will begin reducing its holdings of Treasury and other securities in the near future.

Household and business confidence in the euro area are being hit hard by the increased uncertainty caused by the war in Ukraine, higher energy prices and continuing supply challenges. GDP is nevertheless expected to grow at a faster pace than potential output over the projection horizon as the economy continues to recover from the pandemic. 

Both core and total inflation have risen more quickly than anticipated in recent months and are now well above target. Higher energy and food prices explain a significant portion of the recent increase, although inflationary pressure has become more broad-based across goods and services. The recent increase in energy prices and additional supply constraints related to the invasion of Ukraine are expected to push inflation higher in the near term.

China’s GDP is expected to grow at a modest pace of 4¼% in 2022. Growth is held back in large part by the ongoing correction of its property market and stringent measures to contain a resurgence of COVID‑19. Housing markets remain weak, reflecting soft demand and uncertainty about the financial viability of major property developers. High energy prices should also weigh on household and business spending. Chinese stock markets recently reacted sharply to concerns about regulatory changes, financial vulnerabilities and the geopolitical implications of the war in Ukraine. Policy-makers have announced steps to improve confidence and shore up markets.

Growth is projected to recover to about 5% in 2023 and 2024 as the drag on growth from the property sector diminishes. Uncertainty remains high about both the impact of China’s “zero‑COVID” policy and the fragility of the property sector. Either of these factors could dampen growth by more than expected over the projection horizon.

Oil-importing emerging-market economies (EMEs) are recovering from the impact of the Omicron variant more quickly than expected. However, the war in Ukraine and high energy prices are expected to severely hamper growth in 2022 and 2023. Within the group, emerging Europe will be most affected because of its proximity to the conflict, its closer trade ties with both Ukraine and Russia and the war’s direct impact on Ukraine’s economy. In some EMEs, the drag from rising energy prices should be partially offset by increased revenues from exports of non-energy commodities. Higher interest rates in many EMEs in response to increasing inflationary pressures are also weighing on growth prospects.

Growth in the rest of the world group will be held back by the sharp contraction of the Russian economy due to economic sanctions. However, other oil-exporting countries are expected to benefit from increased oil revenues.

The Canadian economy continues to grow strongly. Growth in the second quarter is being boosted by the removal of public health restrictions, solid foreign demand and higher commodity prices.

Labour markets are tight. Employment growth has been strong, with jobs more than recovering from the effects of the Omicron variant of COVID‑19. Labour shortages are widespread across firms, leading to rising wage growth.

A broad set of indicators suggests that slack has been absorbed and the economy is moving into excess demand. Faced with robust demand and supply constraints, firms are raising prices in response to higher input costs. This increases the risk that expectations of elevated inflation could become entrenched.

Overall, economic growth is robust and moderates through the projection horizon. Growth is expected to be 4¼% this year before slowing to a solid pace of 3¼% in 2023. A recovery in services consumption, exports and investment supports growth. At the same time, alongside the 
easing of supply constraints, strong investment and population growth are projected to strengthen potential output growth. In response to ongoing inflationary pressures, higher interest rates are expected to moderate growth in domestic demand to better align it with the growth of supply. GDP growth is projected to ease to about 2¼% in 2024.

The war in Ukraine is affecting the Canadian economy predominantly through higher commodity prices. Households are feeling this impact through increased prices for gasoline, fuel oil and food.

Consumer price index (CPI) inflation is forecast to average just under 6% in the first half of 2022. Factors driving inflation include sharp increases in energy and food prices as well as supply disruptions and strong demand for goods. As these pressures dissipate and monetary policy accommodation is removed, CPI inflation is anticipated to ease to about 2½% in the second half of 2023 before declining to the 2% target in 2024. In this projection, inflation is both higher and more persistent than in the January Report.

Economic growth is expected to pick up to about 6% in the second quarter of 2022 from a solid pace of 3% in the first quarter. The effects of the Omicron variant weighed on economic activity in the first weeks of the year, but these effects were short-lived, and household consumption was resilient. Growth is on track for a strong consumption-led pickup in the second quarter as pandemic restrictions are removed. This is despite supply disruptions and labour shortages continuing to hold back the production and availability of a wide range of goods.

Housing market activity remained strong in the first quarter. The pandemic-induced increase in demand for more housing space, along with still-low borrowing rates and high disposable income, has boosted activity. Resales are expected to soften somewhat in the second quarter as borrowing rates rise. Low levels of both builders’ inventories and existing homes for sale should support new construction and renovations in the near term.

Exports and business investment are expected to grow strongly in the second quarter as they continue to recover toward pre-pandemic levels. Higher energy prices are boosting growth in energy exports and investment. Outside the energy sector, solid foreign demand and a rebound in exports of motor vehicles are supporting exports.

Employment bounced back sharply in recent months. Overall measures of labour market health are strong when compared with a wide range of benchmarks. For instance, employment and total hours worked have surpassed pre-pandemic levels. Moreover, many of the groups hit hardest by the pandemic have seen robust recoveries, notably young women.

In the Bank of Canada’s Business Outlook Survey (BOS) for the first quarter of 2022, indicators of labour shortages remain elevated. Most firms experiencing labour shortages expect them to persist until at least 2023. While roughly two-thirds of respondents plan to increase the size of their workforce to meet strong demand, many cited difficulty finding workers.

Wage growth has risen to near pre-pandemic levels. Wage growth is expected to increase further alongside elevated job vacancies, workers’ increased willingness to switch jobs and a record-low unemployment rate. The strengthening in wages is consistent with the latest BOS, where firms report having difficulty attracting and retaining staff.

A broad set of measures suggests that economic slack has been absorbed and that the economy is starting to operate beyond its productive capacity.

Canadian firms are increasingly facing capacity pressures amid a tight labour market and pervasive supply chain challenges. Roughly 8 out of 10 respondents to the BOS said they would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand—a new survey high. More firms intend to pass cost increases related to supply chain disruptions and rising wages into their output prices. Core measures of inflation have all risen materially above 2%.

Taking these respective demand and supply pressures into account, the Bank estimates that the output gap has risen to between ‑0.25% and 0.75% for the first quarter of 2022, up from the estimate of ‑0.75% to 0.25% for the last quarter of 2021. With robust growth expected in the second quarter, the economy is moving into excess demand.

Elevated energy and food prices are expected to push CPI inflation to just under 6% in the first half of 2022. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has driven up commodity prices. In Canada, households are feeling this through higher prices for gasoline and fuel oil. The impacts on the cost of wheat, corn and soybeans will also boost food prices in coming quarters, compounding the effects of last year’s drought and supply bottlenecks.

Pervasive supply constraints, together with strong global and domestic demand, are also contributing to the rise in prices of a wide range of goods and services. As a result, price pressures are broadening, with about two‑thirds of CPI components growing above 3%.

Measures of core inflation continue to rise alongside widening inflationary pressures, with CPI-trim, CPI-median and CPI-common at 4.3%, 3.5% and 2.6%, respectively. The increases reflect more widespread price pressures and are consistent with an economy that is moving into excess demand.

Growth is projected to be 4¼% in 2022, easing to a still-solid pace of 3¼% in 2023, supported by robust domestic demand and exports. The tight labour market and improved terms of trade are expected to boost aggregate income and wealth. In turn, high income and a drawdown of some pandemic-related savings will drive domestic spending. In addition, an increase in potential output will further support growth in domestic income and demand.

Pandemic-related restrictions and supply disruptions have weighed on output. With employment growing faster than output, productivity growth has been weak. However, public health restrictions have now been largely removed, and supply disruptions are expected to dissipate gradually by mid‑2023. As caution around the pandemic fades and supply shortages ease, GDP is expected to grow faster than employment, and output per worker to rise.

Together with robust business investment and higher immigration, this rise in labour productivity growth is projected to boost supply growth from about 1¾% this year to roughly 3¼% in 2023. This will provide room for solid economic growth with declining inflation.

Higher interest rates in Canada and the normalization of monetary policy globally are expected to moderate domestic demand growth. GDP and supply growth will both ease to about 2¼% and 2½%, respectively, in 2024.

Job gains and the spending of some of the savings accumulated during the pandemic will support consumption growth. Moreover, the lifting of public health restrictions should lead to a continued rebound in spending on hard-to-distance services in the second half of 2022. Consumption of these services will grow at a slower but still-solid pace thereafter, as pandemic-induced caution fades.

In contrast, overall goods consumption is forecast to grow at a more moderate pace. As a result, the balance of consumption between goods and services will return toward pre-pandemic levels over the projection horizon. While consumption growth for most goods will moderate, spending on motor vehicles should pick up as supply challenges in the auto sector are resolved. 

Housing activity is projected to ease from its current level but remain elevated, supported by population growth. Resales are expected to soften as borrowing rates rise and the pandemic-induced demand for more housing space wanes. Meanwhile, the unwinding of supply chain bottlenecks should support new construction as sourcing building materials becomes easier. This growth in housing supply, combined with slowing demand, should help rebalance housing markets over time and help moderate house price growth.

Export growth is expected to be strong in 2022 and 2023, boosted by elevated commodity prices and solid foreign demand coupled with easing supply constraints. Later in the projection, exports are anticipated to continue to grow but at a slower pace.

Energy exports are projected to grow strongly because of high prices and increased transportation capacity. Canadian producers are expected to make full use of existing production and transportation capacity to boost energy exports in 2022. Expansions in crude-by-rail and pipeline capacity, including the scheduled completion of the Trans Mountain Expansion project, will support growth later in the projection horizon.

Non-energy goods exports should grow solidly, supported by the gradual dissipation of global supply disruptions. However, exports of motor vehicles are expected to remain flat after the second quarter of 2022, reflecting supply issues, before declining later in the projection due to restructuring in the sector. Services exports and imports are anticipated to strengthen as travel recovers, but the recovery is expected to take time given the slow return of international tourism.

Goods imports will be supported by strong domestic demand as well as the willingness of firms to invest and rebuild inventories as supply chain issues ease.

Business investment is expected to grow strongly. Investment growth in the oil and gas sector is anticipated to be robust as a result of high energy prices. Heightened global concerns over secure energy supplies should also benefit Canadian producers. However, investment will be 
restrained by labour shortages and ongoing uncertainty about long-term demand and the transition to a low-carbon economy.

Outside the oil and gas sector, investment will be supported by robust demand, the gradual easing of supply constraints and improved business confidence. The outlook is consistent with the results of the BOS, as most businesses said they intend to increase their spending on machinery and equipment. This level of investment intentions was a near-record high for the survey. More firms also reported plans to invest in digital technologies and automation to improve productivity given tight labour markets and rising input costs.

Inventory investment is projected to contribute to growth in 2022 and 2023 as businesses, notably retailers, restock following pandemic shortages.

Inflation is expected to ease over the projection horizon as the effects of high energy prices and supply disruptions fade and monetary policy tightening moderates demand.

With oil prices assumed to decline after the second quarter of 2022, the boost from higher gasoline prices should fade quickly in coming quarters. Upward pressure from supply challenges is also expected to dissipate over 2023. This is consistent with the assumption that the prices for goods affected by supply challenges will not experience price reversals. This anticipated easing in inflationary pressures can be seen in the dynamic of annualized quarter-over-quarter inflation rates, which fall from around 6% in the second quarter of 2022 to about 2½% in the fourth quarter. Year-over-year inflation is anticipated to decrease from about 5¾% in the second quarter of 2022 to about 2½% in the second half of 2023. Inflation is then expected to decline to the 2% target in 2024.

Inflation has been above 3% since the second quarter of 2021. When combined with the outlook, this suggests that inflation is expected to be above the top end of the inflation control range for two years. There is a concern that high and persistent inflation can affect long-term inflation expectations. This matters because inflation expectations are an important 
factor behind future inflation.

The inflation expectations of consumers have increased at the one‑year horizon. Evidence about the evolution of inflation expectations at the two‑year horizon is mixed. Inflation expectations of professional forecasters remain relatively stable, but those of consumers and businesses have increased significantly. Most respondents to both the BOS and the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations for the first quarter of 2022 anticipate inflation will be well above 3% on average over the next two years.

Current high inflation has not, however, resulted in increases in survey-based expectations at longer horizons. Most respondents to the BOS anticipate inflation will be close to the 2% target in three years because of improvements in supply chains and the Bank’s interest rate actions. Inflation expectations also remain relatively stable at the five‑year horizon for both consumers and professional forecasters.

The five‑year break-even inflation rate (BEIR) has increased to near 3%. At this level, the five-year BEIR is consistent with a rise in inflation over the near term followed by a decline toward the 2% target. In this respect, the five‑year BEIR is indicative that longer-term inflation expectations are consistent with the Bank’s projection for inflation.

Since November 2021, the Bank has been in the reinvestment phase. This means that the Bank has been purchasing Government of Canada (GoC) bonds solely to replace maturing bonds. This requires approximately $4 billion to $5 billion in purchases every month, across both the primary and secondary markets. 

Ending the reinvestment phase and initiating quantitative tightening means that the Bank will stop purchasing GoC bonds. Maturing bonds will not be replaced when they roll off the balance sheet. As a result, the Bank’s balance sheet will shrink over time, with roughly 40% of the Bank’s GoC bond holdings maturing within the next two years. 

The longer-run level of settlement balances will be higher than it was before the pandemic. This reflects a variety of factors, including a shift in investor preferences toward safe and liquid assets, changes to the payment system in Canada and regulatory requirements that encourage greater use of central bank deposits.
	
The disruptions related to the COVID‑19 pandemic have diminished, but Russia’s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine has introduced a major new source of uncertainty. Global trade is being disrupted, confidence is declining, and financial markets have been volatile. Moreover, the tragic situation in Ukraine has ignited fears of wider escalation and risks to global economic integration.

A quick end to the war would be positive for global growth and would reduce inflationary pressures. In contrast, a prolonged or worsening conflict would lower confidence, add further stress to supply chains and boost inflation.

Regarding COVID‑19, greater population-wide immunity has led to the removal of public health restrictions and the reopening of economies in most jurisdictions around the world. While the likelihood of another severe downturn has diminished, the virus continues to circulate and mutate. Even without a resurgence of cases, reopening an economy remains complex, and pervasive supply constraints have yet to be unwound.

Some of the risks identified in previous reports have been partially incorporated into the projection. For example, the base-case scenario includes more persistent supply-side disruptions and an upward revision to residential investment.

Outside of the pandemic and the war in Ukraine, the Bank sees several upside and downside risks to the outlook for inflation. The Bank views these risks as roughly balanced. Nonetheless, the upside risks are of greater concern because inflation is very high. Until inflation moves significantly lower, there is an elevated risk that Canadians will start to believe that it will stay high over the long term. Higher inflation expectations could in turn lead to more pervasive increases in labour costs and inflationary pressures and could become embedded in ongoing inflation.

Drawing from a larger set of risks, the Bank presents here a selection of those identified as most important for the projected path of inflation.

Disruptions such as the spread of COVID‑19 variants could further affect manufacturing and shipping activities, causing persistent shortages of goods and labour. In particular, some countries that have had relatively low infection rates to date, such as China, could be subject to more frequent and widespread lockdowns. A drawn-out war in Ukraine could also create additional supply bottlenecks or worsen existing ones even further. Over time, repeated disruptions to business operations may lead firms to adjust their supply chains in ways that could increase costs. More persistent labour shortages could also result in wages rising much faster than productivity growth. Taken together, these effects would lead to greater and longer-lasting inflationary pressures.
	
The base-case scenario assumes that the sharp increase in the level of prices of durables seen since the pandemic began will persist. However, as supply chain bottlenecks dissipate, these prices could decline. Moreover, oil prices and transportation costs could decrease more sharply, or goods consumption could slow faster than projected. If this occurred, inflation would be lower than projected.

The projection continues to include some degree of caution around consumption. However, further reductions in pandemic-related uncertainty could boost confidence by more than expected. Consequently, households could spend more of their accumulated savings. Consumption and residential investment would then be stronger than projected and would contribute to greater inflationary pressures.

Global indebtedness levels, equity valuations and inflationary pressures are all high. These, combined with reduced policy support, could result in a pullback in risk appetite and a sharp tightening of global financial conditions. This would constrain access to credit for vulnerable EMEs or other highly indebted borrowers. In addition, China’s efforts to address vulnerabilities and engineer a soft landing in the property sector could weigh on financial markets more than expected. These shocks could have negative spillover effects on the global economy and would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through a sharp tightening of financial conditions, weaker exports, lower commodity prices and a deterioration in the terms of trade.
	
