Inflation around the world remains high and broad-based, but in many countries it has receded from its peak, largely due to declines in energy prices. With continued easing in global supply chain disruptions, inflation in durable goods prices is also moderating.

Economic activity in advanced economies has been stronger than expected, labour markets remain tight, and core inflation has yet to show sustained improvement. 

With inflation still too high, many central banks have continued to increase their policy rates to slow demand and bring inflation down. 

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine continues to disrupt commodity markets and affect global economic activity. China’s abrupt lifting of COVID-19 restrictions poses an upside risk to commodity prices.

In Canada, higher interest rates are working their way through an overheated economy. It remains in excess demand, and this is putting upward pressure on some domestic prices. The labour market is still tight, and many businesses are finding it difficult to attract workers. 

Monetary policy is slowing demand, helping the economy rebalance. Higher interest rates are weighing on household spending, particularly on housing and big-ticket items. As the effects of higher interest rates continue to spread through the economy, spending on consumer services and business investment is also expected to slow further. As well, weaker foreign demand will weigh on exports. 
 
Growth is expected to stall through the middle of 2023, allowing supply to catch up with demand. On an annual average basis, growth of gross domestic product (GDP) is projected to slow to about 1% in 2023.

With the declines in energy prices, improved global supply chains and a slowdown in demand, consumer price index (CPI) inflation is expected to decline significantly this year. CPI inflation is projected to fall to around 3% in the middle of 2023 and reach the 2% target in 2024.
 
With inflation back to target, sustainable growth in the Canadian economy will resume, picking up to about 2% in 2024. 

Inflation has peaked and is easing in many countries, mainly because of declines in energy prices, improvements in supply chains and lower demand for traded goods. Core inflation, however, has yet to show a sustained improvement. 

In advanced economies, labour markets are tight and consumer spending has been robust, particularly in the United States. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine continues to disrupt commodity markets and economic activity, hitting European economies especially hard. 

Major central banks raised policy interest rates sharply over 2022. While the pace of tightening has recently slowed in several countries, some central banks have communicated the need for further policy rate increases. Despite this, global financial conditions have eased modestly since the time of the October Report.

Global economic activity is stronger than expected, led by consumption in many regions. Growth is projected to slow in 2023 to roughly 2% as pent-up demand from the pandemic fades and the rise in interest rates slows activity. Growth is then expected to pick up to about 2½% in 2024, with monetary policy still restraining the level of activity.

The Bank expects that inflation will decline over the projection, moving closer to central bank targets. Previous drops in commodity prices, a further easing of supply challenges and slower demand growth in response to tighter monetary policy will all exert downward pressure on inflation.

Inflation is coming off multi-decade highs in many countries. But core inflation has been more persistent.

In the United States, inflation is projected to continue easing. Inflation in goods prices is expected to fall further due to past declines in commodity prices, slowing demand and improvements in global supply conditions.

Meanwhile, inflation in services prices has remained strong and broad-based. It will take some time for higher interest rates to help bring this down. The labour market is tight, labour costs in the services sector are growing strongly, and near-term inflation expectations are high. Inflation in shelter costs should ease earlier than that of other services, given that inflation in new rental agreements has already started to decline.

In contrast, the key drivers of higher inflation in Europe have been more heavily influenced by increases in energy costs linked to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the past depreciation of the euro. Tight labour markets are also adding to labour costs. Services price inflation has risen and become increasingly broad-based with the reopening of economies in the region. Inflation is expected to decline over the projection horizon as the war’s effects on food and energy price inflation dissipate, past effects of supply chain disruptions fade, and higher interest rates reduce demand growth. 

With major central banks rapidly tightening monetary policy to address persistent inflationary pressures, financial conditions are restrictive. Nominal and real yields on long-term government bonds have risen substantially since the start of 2022. In particular, the yield on inflation-indexed 10-year US Treasury bonds has averaged 1.4% since the October Report—near its highest level in the past decade. 

Nonetheless, financial conditions have eased somewhat since the October Report. This largely reflects a decline in risk premiums across asset classes because headline inflation has edged down from its peak and the perceived risk of an overtightening of monetary policy has decreased. 

The Can$/US$ exchange rate has been reasonably stable at around 74 cents since the October Report. In contrast, the Canadian dollar has substantially depreciated against the currencies of other key trading partners, reversing the appreciation that took place through much of 2022.

The Bank projects US activity to remain generally flat through 2023, mostly because of the rise in interest rates. Growth is then expected to pick up gradually over the course of 2024, as the effects on growth of monetary policy tightening fade. 

The outlook for Canadian exports largely depends on three components of US demand.
	
The recent strength in consumption spending is anticipated to slow in early 2023. The boost to growth coming from high demand for in-person services and a catch-up in motor vehicle sales should diminish over time. Consumption spending is expected to pick up again in 2024 as the impact of higher interest rates on growth dissipates. 
	
US residential investment has fallen sharply in response to the rise in mortgage interest rates. This weakness is projected to continue through the first half of 2023. New household formation and growth in disposable income are expected to contribute to a rebound in residential investment growth in the second half of the year.
	
Business investment is projected to contract over 2023 and 2024 due to weak demand and the high cost of capital.

The impact of the Russian invasion of Ukraine has weighed heavily on economic activity in the euro area. Elevated natural gas prices have constrained industrial production, and high inflation has eroded purchasing power. Recent increases in interest rates are also starting to weigh on demand. Business and consumer confidence has weakened considerably.

Warmer-than-normal weather this winter has helped bring down natural gas prices, and economic activity has been stronger than expected. The impacts of the war and higher interest rates will continue to impede growth in 2023, but it is expected to pick up in 2024 as global demand recovers.

China abruptly lifted many of its COVID-19 restrictions late in 2022, leading to considerable uncertainty about its economic outlook. The virus has spread rapidly, weighing on economic activity. Yet, with the reopened economy, growth is projected to rebound strongly as case numbers subside from their currently high level. 

The property sector will continue to slow activity. Past regulatory tightening—aimed at reducing speculation and excess leverage among developers—continues to cause the sector to contract sharply. While some recently announced policy measures should help stabilize activity, the outlook for the property market remains uncertain. 

Overall, growth in China is expected to strengthen in 2023 as in-person activity rebounds, then to moderate in 2024 as activity normalizes.

Oil prices have fallen since the October Report, partly because of an improved outlook for global oil supply. Markets now seem to expect that Western sanctions will have less of an effect on Russian oil production. In the Bank’s projection, the price for Brent oil is assumed to be US$85 per barrel, while the price for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) is assumed to be US$5 below the Brent price.

Since the October Report, the price for Western Canadian Select (WCS) has traded, on average, close to US$30 per barrel lower than the price for WTI. Refinery outages and heavily discounted barrels of Russian heavy oil on the global market have led to a wider-than-normal spread. The spread is anticipated to narrow as refineries come back online in early 2023 and with the completion of the new Trans Mountain pipeline expansion in 2024. Given this dynamic, the Bank assumes a constant spread between WCS and WTI of US$20 over the projection.

Natural gas prices have fallen sharply, with benchmark prices for both the United States and Europe below their levels at the time of the October Report. Price movements have tended to track weather conditions in the northern hemisphere. European prices continue to trade well above US prices, given concerns about shortages caused by Russia’s decision to restrict gas exports to the continent. 
	
The Bank’s non-energy commodity price index is roughly unchanged and is expected to remain near current levels over the projection. Base metal prices rose after China announced additional support for its property sector, while lumber prices have fallen as North American housing demand continues to weaken. Agricultural prices are largely the same as in October.

CPI inflation in Canada is still too high but has declined from its recent peak. Ongoing excess demand in the economy continues to exert upward pressure on prices. But, with lower energy prices, improvements in global supply chains and the effects of higher interest rates moving through the economy, inflation has started to ease. 

CPI inflation is forecast to fall to 3% in mid-2023 and return to the 2% target in 2024. Inflation in 2023 is anticipated to be lower than projected in the October Report. This is mainly due to gasoline prices dropping more than expected and global supply chains improving more quickly than anticipated.

Economic growth is projected to slow at the end of 2022 and to stall through the middle of 2023. The tightening of monetary policy initially slowed housing activity followed by consumer demand for durables in the middle of 2022. The effects of the rise in interest rates are expected to broaden and moderate consumer spending on services as well as investment spending in 2023. Growth is then projected to pick up in late 2023.

At 6.3% in December, CPI inflation remains high and broad-based, with core inflation at about 5%.2 CPI inflation has, however, declined in recent months, and the large price increases that were prominent during the rise in inflation are now a little less widespread.
	
Most of the decline is due to lower gasoline prices, which fell from about $2 per litre in June 2022 to about $1.50 per litre in January 2023.  
	
Inflation for prices of goods excluding energy and food in stores has declined. This is because of reduced demand for goods in Canada and abroad, combined with improving global supply conditions and falling costs for international shipping.
	
However, inflation for prices of services excluding shelter is more persistent. 
	
For food and shelter services, inflation remains particularly high. This is because ongoing cost pressures are boosting food prices, while falling house prices are being offset by rising mortgage interest costs.

Three-month CPI inflation has fallen to about 3½%, suggesting a significant slowdown in inflation in coming months. But a further drop will be required for inflation to reach the 2% target. 

Most respondents to consumer and business surveys still expect that, over the next two years, CPI inflation will be well above 2% and higher than the Bank’s inflation forecast. For the fourth quarter of 2022, many respondents to both the Business Outlook Survey (BOS) and the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations (CSCE) identified supply-side issues as the main factors behind high inflation. These include the effects of supply chain disruptions, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, high energy prices and labour shortages.

Short-term inflation expectations in the BOS have declined from their peak in the second quarter of 2022. At the same time, the share of firms expecting significant price increases has continued to decrease. However, the distribution of inflation expectations remains markedly wider than it was before the pandemic, suggesting that the level of uncertainty about inflation over the next few years remains high.

Long-term expectations for CPI inflation, in contrast, remain consistent with the 2% target. This signals respondents’ ongoing confidence that the Bank will return inflation to 2%.

The pace of economic growth in Canada is slowing, but demand continues to exceed supply. 

The labour market is still tight across a broad range of measures, suggesting that it remains above maximum sustainable employment. Employment gains were robust in the fourth quarter of 2022. More than 220,000 net jobs were created, and the unemployment rate, at 5%, is near an all-time low. The number of job vacancies also remains high despite recent declines. Firms continue to have difficulties finding workers, which reflects strong labour demand, the impacts of an aging population and shortages of available workers with the desired skills.

Wage growth remains broad-based and appears to have plateaued in the 4% to 5% range. With the pace of wage growth no longer increasing, the risk of a wage-price spiral has declined. However, unless a surprisingly strong pickup in productivity growth occurs, sustained 4% to 5% wage growth is not consistent with achieving the 2% inflation target.

Monetary policy appears to be slowing the demand for labour. Employment growth has been weaker in sectors that are sensitive to changes in the interest rate, including manufacturing, construction and trade. Overall, employment growth in the second half of 2022 moderated compared with that in the first half of the year. The full effects of high interest rates on the labour market are expected to play out over an extended period.

Improvements can already be seen on the supply side. In the most recent BOS, the number of Canadian firms reporting obstacles due to supply chain bottlenecks was cut in half. With fewer supply chain bottlenecks constraining activity, goods imports and inventory investment remained high in the third quarter of 2022. 

Despite this improvement, many Canadian firms continue to face supply-side difficulties. Businesses continue to report challenges sourcing a wide range of inputs, including building materials, restaurant supplies and food products. Labour shortages are also restricting firms’ ability to meet demand from their customers. 

The estimate of the output gap—the difference between GDP and potential output—is between 0.5% and 1.5% in the fourth quarter of 2022. This is more excess demand than was projected in the October Report.

Growth is estimated to have slowed in the fourth quarter of 2022, with activity expected to stall through the middle of 2023. In this context, the likelihood of a couple of quarters with slightly negative growth is roughly the same as that of a couple of quarters with slightly positive growth.

The rise in interest rates started to slow demand for housing and big-ticket items in 2022, although motor vehicle sales likely ended the year strong because deliveries started to catch up with orders. The tightening of monetary policy in Canada and abroad is expected to have broader effects in 2023. Spending on consumer services and business investment is expected to slow, while weaker foreign demand weighs on exports. 

Slower demand growth, combined with improvements in the supply chain, lead the economy into modest excess supply in 2023.

Growth is projected to pick up later in 2023, reaching 2½% in the second half of 2024 as the effects of interest rate increases fade. Strong population growth due to immigration provides important underlying support to real economic growth. Potential output growth settles just above 2% in 2023 and 2024.

Consumer spending is projected to remain subdued through much of 2023. Responses to the CSCE indicate that consumers are cutting spending and delaying purchases across a broad range of goods and services because of high interest rates and elevated inflation.

The rise in borrowing costs is expected to continue to strain many household budgets. Interest payments on household mortgages are estimated to be about 4.5% of disposable income at the beginning of 2023, up from 3.2% at the beginning of 2022.3 The share of income going to mortgage interest payments is anticipated to continue rising as more homeowners renew their mortgages at higher rates.

Elevated interest rates are also increasing the costs of financing big-ticket items such as furniture and appliances. Spending on these items has decreased and is expected to remain subdued throughout 2023. As the effects of higher interest rates continue to work their way through the economy, spending on services will also be affected. Experience suggests that the demand for communications services, travel, hotels and meals at restaurants will be the most affected services components.4 Low consumer confidence and reduced household wealth due to falling house prices will also restrain household spending.
 
Consumption growth is expected to increase at the end of 2023 and continue to strengthen through 2024. This is because the restraining effects on spending associated with higher interest rates should stabilize. Strong population growth supports consumer spending over the projection horizon. The savings rate is expected to remain above its long-run average due to elevated interest rates and precautionary savings. 

The pullback in housing activity that began in 2022 is expected to continue over the near term. House prices are projected to decline further, particularly in markets that saw significant increases during the pandemic. Growth in new construction and housing resales will likely pick up by the second half of 2023, supported by low inventories and strong demand from immigration. 

Soft foreign demand weighs on export growth over the near term. Growth strengthens in 2024 as the global recovery takes hold.

Growth of non-commodity exports is modest in 2023 before increasing in 2024. The easing of supply chain disruptions and the ongoing recovery in international travel are anticipated to support growth this year.

Non-energy commodity exports are expected to continue to grow at a solid pace in 2023, boosted by shipments of the abundant 2022 harvest. In 2024, growth in this sector should remain robust as global growth strengthens.

Growth in energy exports is anticipated to be moderate in 2023, and then pick up strongly in 2024 with the completion of the Trans Mountain Expansion project.

Imports are projected to decline in the near term, largely due to the slowdown in inventory investment from currently elevated levels. Imports increase later in the projection horizon because of strengthening domestic demand and the growing number of Canadians travelling abroad.

Growth in business investment is expected to be slow over the projection horizon, strengthening only toward the end of 2024. Ongoing digital transformation is expected to continue to support business investment throughout the period.

Slowing demand, elevated borrowing costs and increased uncertainty about future economic conditions weaken investment outside the oil and gas sector in 2023. BOS respondents frequently cited high borrowing costs as a key factor weighing on investment intentions. Investment picks up modestly in 2024 as demand strengthens.

After solid gains in 2021 and 2022, growth in investment in the oil and gas sector is projected to moderate. This is partly due to uncertainty about long-term demand around the transition to a low-carbon economy.

Although firms are expected to continue to rebuild their stocks as supply chain bottlenecks ease further, they are projected to accumulate inventory more slowly. 

CPI inflation is forecast to decline from 6.7% in the fourth quarter of 2022 to 3% in the middle of 2023 and to reach the 2% target in 2024. In 2023, it is anticipated to be somewhat lower than projected in the October Report due to weaker gasoline prices and a quicker improvement in supply chain disruptions.

A large share of firms that responded to the BOS continue to expect that pressures on their input costs and output prices will be less intense going forward than they were over the past 12 months. Moreover, many businesses report that they are gradually returning to price-setting practices they used before the pandemic. These include reducing the size and frequency of price changes, tracking competitors’ pricing more closely and waiting for cost increases to materialize before considering altering prices.5 This could result in some narrowing of pricing margins.

Inflation is projected to reach 3.5% in the second quarter of 2023. The slowdown reflects the sharp decline in quarter-over-quarter price growth that occurred in the second half of 2022. The decline results from a sharp fall in energy prices and weaker inflation in goods excluding food and energy. The weaker inflation in goods comes about from slower global demand for goods, an improvement in supply chains, a decline in the costs of some materials and a return to more normal pricing behaviour.

In contrast, inflation in the prices of services excluding shelter is projected to remain elevated through the first half of 2023. This is consistent with robust demand and continued strong growth in unit labour costs. Inflation for prices of shelter and food in stores ease but remain elevated and above CPI inflation.

Inflation is projected to continue to decline toward the target through 2024. This reflects more normal global supply conditions and the effects of higher interest rates on demand for services. However, considerable uncertainty surrounds the outlook. In particular, it could take longer than expected for the rise in interest rates to weaken both demand and labour costs enough to push services price inflation down significantly.

The risks identified in the October Report remain important for the inflation outlook. Although the Bank views these risks as roughly balanced, the upside risks are of greater concern because inflation is still too high.

The main upside risk is that services price inflation in Canada could be stickier than projected if elevated inflation expectations or increased labour costs prove more persistent than expected. There is also risk of a resurgence in global energy prices related to a faster rebound in the Chinese economy and ongoing uncertainty about Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. These risks were identified in the October Report and remain a concern. 

Although short-term inflation expectations in Canada have declined and fewer firms expect large price increases, short-term inflation expectations remain above the Bank’s inflation forecast. Survey responses indicate that the distribution of expectations is wider than normal. As a result, the risk remains that inflation expectations and therefore inflation could be higher than expected. This risk is most pronounced for inflation in services.

Services price inflation could also remain elevated if labour costs rise more than projected. Growth in labour costs is about 5% on a year-over-year basis. In the projection, growth in overall labour costs moderates to fall in line with the 2% inflation target. Services price inflation could be more persistent than projected if productivity growth rebounds more slowly than expected or if the labour market remains tighter for longer than anticipated.

Global factors such as improved supply chains and lower energy prices have eased pressure on inflation more than anticipated at the time of the October Report. But China’s lifting of COVID-19 restrictions could lead to stronger-than-projected global growth and higher commodity prices, especially for oil. The ability of the world’s energy supply to respond to shocks is weaker than in the past, exacerbating this risk. An intensification of the supply disruptions related to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine could also trigger spikes in the prices of oil, natural gas and agricultural products. More broadly, an increase in geopolitical tensions could prolong disruptions to supply chains, risking higher prices on internationally traded goods. 

An additional upside risk to the inflation outlook identified in October was that households could draw on their accumulated wealth and savings more than expected. This would lead to increased household spending and greater upward pressure on inflation. Since then, however, consumption spending has been weaker than expected, so this risk to the inflation outlook is somewhat reduced.
	
Similar to that noted in the October Report, a severe global slowdown is the key downside risk to inflation. As monetary policy tightens in key economies, long-standing global financial vulnerabilities, such as high levels of debt, could amplify the impacts of slowing global growth. 

The Canadian economy could be affected through weaker foreign demand, lower terms of trade and spillovers into Canada’s financial system. The resulting tighter financial conditions and higher unemployment could undermine homebuyer sentiment and lead to a larger-than-expected drop in house prices. This in turn could reduce household wealth, access to credit 
and consumer confidence. 

The risk of a severe global downturn remains but appears to have lessened since the October Report. The outlook for growth has improved, financial conditions have eased, and the US dollar has weakened. The weaker US dollar has reduced pressure on some emerging-market economies.

The October Report also outlined the risk that the spike in some goods prices since the beginning of the pandemic could be reversed. While energy and transportation costs have fallen and inflation in some goods prices has eased, widespread price reversals have not yet occurred.
