Inflation around the world has continued to rise quickly, largely due to increases in the prices for energy and food. Global supply chain challenges have also persisted, and when combined with strong demand, this has led to a broadening in price pressures. 

Global growth is slowing due to Russia’s aggression in Ukraine and continued supply chain disruptions. As well, high inflation and monetary policy tightening in many countries are beginning to moderate demand.

With the removal of most public health restrictions in Canada, economic activity in hard-to-distance service sectors has rebounded strongly. With the rest of the economy already more than fully recovered, the Canadian economy is now clearly in excess demand. While high inflation in Canada is largely the result of international factors, domestic demand pressures are becoming more prominent, and price pressures have broadened. 

In response to high inflation and rising inflation expectations, the Bank of Canada is raising interest rates. This will temper borrowing and spending, slow demand growth, help anchor inflation expectations and ultimately reduce inflationary pressures. 

The global economy is facing multiple headwinds. Inflation is high worldwide and continues to increase, largely due to surging energy and food prices. Supply challenges are contributing to inflationary pressures as demand is recovering from the pandemic. Global economic activity is estimated to have declined in the second quarter of 2022 because of the war in Ukraine and the lockdown of some major cities in China to limit the spread of COVID-19. Growth in US private domestic demand is also estimated to have slowed sharply. Many central banks are tightening monetary policy to combat increasingly broad-based inflationary pressures. As a result, financial conditions have tightened, and this is weighing on global growth. 

Growth should rebound in the third quarter as restrictions ease in China, but higher interest rates and the war in Ukraine will continue to restrain activity. The Bank projects global growth to moderate to about 3¼% in 2022 and 2% in 2023—a slower pace than projected in the April Report mostly because of tighter monetary policy. Global growth is expected to strengthen to 3% in 2024 once the war’s impact on growth subsides.

Energy prices remain volatile. Since the April Report, Brent crude oil prices have fluctuated between about US$100 and US$125 per barrel. Oil prices fell in early May due to reduced demand from China in the wake of COVID-19 containment measures. Supply concerns, including the European Union’s ban on Russian oil imports, subsequently pushed prices up. Over the past month, prices have fallen due to concerns about a significant slowdown in global growth. 

Prices of natural gas have also been volatile. While they remain high in Europe and Asia due to concerns about Russia’s supply of natural gas, prices fell recently in North America. Prices of refined products, such as gasoline and diesel, are disproportionally higher than oil prices because of low inventories and reduced refining capacity as well as war-related disruptions. 

Looking ahead, Brent oil prices are assumed to fall slowly to US$100 by the end of 2024 (Box 2). Prices for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) and Western Canadian Select (WCS) are assumed to follow similar patterns, remaining US$5 and US$20 below Brent prices, respectively. With this outlook, the Bank assumes that the impact of war-related factors on oil prices diminishes gradually. 

Risks around the outlook for oil prices are two-sided. Russia may face additional sanctions for its invasion of Ukraine that could further reduce Russian oil production. This would put more upward pressure on oil prices. In contrast, price pressures could be lower if the war-related uncertainty dissipates faster than expected or if Russia exports more of its oil to Asia.

Since the April Report, the Bank’s non-energy commodity price index has fallen by roughly 15%. Prices for base metals have declined sharply because of concerns about global demand, particularly demand from China. Lumber prices also fell abruptly due to weakening housing activity in North America. Prices of agricultural products have declined, reflecting favourable weather that is boosting harvest prospects. Even with the recent decline, prices for most non-energy commodities are still likely to stay above their pre-pandemic levels over the projection horizon.

Inflation is high and becoming more broad-based across goods and services in most regions. Short-term inflation expectations are elevated in many countries. Surging energy and food prices remain key contributors to inflation. Elevated demand is leading to a broadening of inflationary pressures, allowing high energy prices to pass through to other prices. 

Widespread supply shortages continue to be an important source of global inflationary pressure. While shipping costs have moderated and supplier delivery times have improved slightly in recent months, lockdowns in China and the war in Ukraine have caused new supply disruptions. The Bank assumes that global supply challenges will ease over the next year.

Inflation is projected to rise further and to peak in most regions in the third quarter of this year. It is expected to gradually decline thereafter because, in the projection, the effects of past increases in energy and food prices dissipate, energy prices decline, supply challenges ease, and demand slows. 

Global financial conditions are more restrictive than in the April Report. Equity prices have declined, and corporate bond spreads have widened. Global government bond yields have experienced significant volatility since the April Report. They initially rose as central banks in advanced and emerging economies continued to tighten monetary policy. Yields on longer-term government bonds have retreated somewhat over the past few weeks due to concerns about the prospects for global growth but remain higher than in April. The Canadian dollar depreciated against the US dollar, although less so than most other currencies.  

The US economy is in excess demand, and the labour market is tight. Job openings are near record levels, and the unemployment rate is close to a 40-year low. Wage growth has been rising rapidly over the past year, though not by enough to keep up with inflation. However, consumption and housing activity have weakened considerably in recent months as high inflation and the rising path of interest rates reduce demand. 

To combat high inflation, the Federal Reserve has increased the target range for the federal funds rate by 150 basis points since the start of 2022. In June, the Federal Reserve also started reducing the size of its balance sheet—a process known as quantitative tightening. 

The US economy is on track to grow by about 2% in 2022, supported by the ongoing recovery and households spending their previously accumulated savings. Consumption and business investment are expected to slow as higher interest rates work their way through the economy. GDP growth in the United States is anticipated to moderate to about 1% in 2023 and in 2024.

The war in Ukraine and associated uncertainty are weighing heavily on the euro area economy. Surging energy prices and trade disruptions are dampening production. High inflation is eroding household purchasing power and hurting consumer confidence. In response to elevated inflation, the European Central Bank ended its net asset purchases and announced plans to raise its policy rates in the coming months. Overall, growth is projected to slow from 2¾% in 2022 to 1% in 2023. Growth is expected to pick up in 2024 as the effects of the war and elevated energy prices fade.  

China’s economy likely contracted in the second quarter because of strict measures to contain outbreaks of COVID-19. Lockdowns in important manufacturing and trading hubs temporarily hampered production and trade and have compounded challenges with global supply chains. Mobility restrictions and the ongoing correction in the property sector are weighing on domestic demand. 

Authorities have introduced several policies to stimulate growth, including additional infrastructure spending, targeted tax cuts and lower mortgage rates. China’s economy should rebound in the third quarter of 2022 because of this policy stimulus and the recent easing of lockdown measures. Uncertainty about the growth outlook remains high, given the fragility of the property sector and the risk of even more intense lockdowns if another wave of COVID-19 occurs.

The war in Ukraine, high energy prices and, to a lesser extent, China’s lockdowns are hampering growth in oil-importing emerging-market economies (EMEs), particularly in Europe and Asia. The sharp tightening of financial conditions in many EMEs is also weighing on domestic demand. As a result, growth is expected to moderate in 2022 and 2023 before picking up in 2024 as the effects of these headwinds dissipate. 

Activity in the rest-of-the-world group is held back by tighter global financial conditions and by the sharp contraction of the Russian economy due to economic sanctions. However, other oil-exporting countries are expected to benefit from increased oil revenues.
	
Inflation continues to rise and broaden in Canada, reflecting widespread cost pressures. Global factors—including high prices for energy, food and tradable goods—are driving most of the surge. In addition, excess demand in the Canadian economy is playing a more significant role. It is making firms more likely to pass cost increases on to consumers, leading to a broadening of inflationary pressures.

Businesses and consumers increasingly think that inflation will be higher for longer, and they are more uncertain about the future path of inflation. This points to an increasing risk that elevated inflation will become entrenched.

CPI inflation is forecast to average around 8% in the middle quarters of 2022. It is then projected to ease to roughly 3% by the end of 2023 and return to target by the end of 2024. Inflation declines as the impact of higher energy prices dissipates, supply challenges recede, and monetary policy in Canada and abroad reduces domestic and foreign demand. In this projection, inflation is considerably higher and more persistent than in the April Report.

Growth has been robust over the past year as the Canadian economy recovered from the worst effects of the pandemic. Strong housing markets, high commodity prices and the easing of public health restrictions have boosted economic activity. However, economic growth is now showing signs of slowing. The effects of higher prices and interest rates have begun to weigh on household spending. In particular, a sharp slowdown in the housing market is underway. 

Overall, economic growth is forecast to be strong in 2022 at about 3½% and to moderate to about 1¾% in 2023 and 2½% in 2024. Growth slows largely due to the impact of high inflation and tighter financial conditions on consumption and housing activity. A weaker outlook for global growth also weighs on exports and business investment. The Canadian growth outlook is revised down in 2022 and 2023 relative to the April Report.

CPI inflation has continued to rise and is now expected to reach about 8% in the third quarter of 2022. Global factors remain the largest drivers. These include Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, which has further pushed up food and gasoline prices. As well, tradable goods prices, including high freight costs, continue to put pressure on global costs.

Domestic demand conditions are also contributing to elevated inflation. The pandemic saw a profound shift in consumer preferences toward goods and low-contact services. In addition to the strength in goods prices, shelter prices, which include rent, have risen significantly over the past year. With the recent removal of health restrictions, prices for hard-to-distance services, such as traveller accommodations, have also been increasing. 

Overall, demand remains robust. It has enabled many firms to raise prices—passing on to consumers higher costs, including the recent spike in energy prices. As a result, inflation has broadened, with almost three-quarters of CPI categories growing above 3% and more than half growing above 5%.

Measures of core inflation have increased further since the April Report. CPI-trim, CPI-median and CPI-common are at 5.4%, 4.9% and 3.9%, respectively. The rise in CPI-common—which puts more weight on services and domestic conditions—reflects growing excess demand in Canada.

Inflation expectations have a direct impact on inflation because they are factored in when firms set wages and prices. To assess inflation expectations, the Bank relies on various survey results and market-based information. Consumer and business surveys indicate that median inflation expectations over the next two years have increased. Inflation expectations of professional forecasters have also increased at the two-year horizon, albeit much more modestly than those of households and firms. Household and business surveys also show a wider distribution of inflation expectations among respondents. In particular, a large number of participants in the Business Outlook Survey (BOS) for the second quarter of 2022—considerably more than in previous surveys—now think that inflation will be at or well above 4% over the next two years. These survey results suggest greater uncertainty about the future path of inflation, increasing the risk that inflation expectations become de-anchored.

Survey participants continue to point to global factors as the primary reason for higher expected inflation. However, they increasingly mention domestic factors, such as strong demand and persistent labour shortages. 

The surveys show that inflation expectations at longer horizons have increased but remain in line with their pre-pandemic levels. While BOS results indicate that businesses now think inflation will remain above 2% for longer, the majority of respondents still expect inflation to return to target within the next three years. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are also in line with the Bank’s inflation target. The five-year break-even inflation rate has decreased recently to about 2¼%. At this level, it is consistent with a rise in inflation over the near term followed by a decline toward the 2% target.

The Bank has tightened monetary policy in response to the strength of inflationary pressures, beginning to increase its policy rate in March and initiating quantitative tightening on April 25.

Higher policy rates, market expectations of further rate increases, and quantitative tightening in Canada and elsewhere have contributed to rapid increases in borrowing costs for businesses and households. Households seeking to renew or take on a new mortgage now face five-year fixed mortgage rates at their highest level since 2010. According to the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations for the second quarter of 2022, consumers expect that accessing credit 12 months from now will be more 
difficult.

Following several robust quarters, economic growth is expected to slow from about 4% in the second quarter to about 2% in the third. Consumption growth moderates as the boost from pent-up demand for in-person services eases. High inflation is also squeezing household budgets, and rising interest rates are increasing the cost to finance purchases of big-ticket items and making savings more attractive.

Housing market activity is weakening substantially from its unsustainable pace during the pandemic. Resales are falling across most regions and prices are declining in some markets as borrowing rates rise and household confidence declines. Some areas outside downtown cores, which had previously seen large price increases, are now experiencing a decline in 
prices.

Exports and business investment continue to grow strongly, with the latter expected to reach pre-pandemic levels in the third quarter. Recent strength in US industrial production and an easing of travel restrictions should provide support for exports over the near term. As well, elevated energy prices are boosting exports and investment in the energy sector as firms seek to make full use of existing production capacity. Near-term business investment is also supported by a ramping up of work at LNG Canada’s Kitimat site and continued work modernizing electric vehicle manufacturing.

A broad set of measures indicates that the economy is operating beyond its productive capacity. 

The labour market is tight along all dimensions.4 Most indicators suggest the labour market has surpassed maximum sustainable employment, including the unemployment rate, which is at a series low. In turn, labour shortages are pushing wages higher. In the BOS for the second quarter of 2022, a near-record number of firms see labour shortages as more intense than they were a year ago. The ratios of vacancies and job postings to unemployed workers have also risen to record levels. As a result of this tightness, wage growth is strengthening and broadening across sectors.

Businesses continue to report capacity constraints, including labour shortages and supply chain challenges. Supply constraints are still weighing on production and sales. This is particularly acute in the auto sector, where it continues to be difficult to source semiconductors and get motor vehicles to retailers. 

The Bank estimates that the output gap—the difference between GDP and supply—has risen further into positive territory in the second quarter of 2022, to between 0.5% and 1.5%. This is up from the estimate of -0.25% to 0.75% for the first quarter. With economic growth anticipated to be roughly in line with supply growth in the third quarter, the economy remains in excess demand.

The Canadian economy is anticipated to grow by about 3½% over 2022, boosted by pent-up domestic demand. Growth then slows to about 1¾% in 2023 in response to higher interest rates, lower commodity prices and declining foreign demand. Economic growth reaches 2½% in 2024 as household spending improves.

Supply growth is forecast to rebound from about ¾% in 2022 to about 2¾% on average over 2023–24. It strengthens over the projection horizon as global transportation bottlenecks and shortages of critical inputs ease. The easing of supply constraints, together with robust business investment, drives a rebound in productivity from its recent lows. Meanwhile, higher immigration will boost labour supply.

Excess demand in the Canadian economy eases over the projection horizon as demand moderates and supply strengthens. The output gap is expected to close in 2023 and move into modest excess supply in 2024.

Inflation is expected to decline over the projection horizon. Inflation falls from about 8% in the third quarter of 2022 to roughly 3% by the end of 2023. A decline in oil prices and lower house prices pull down quarter-over-quarter inflation in the second half of 2022. This helps lay the foundation for the decline in inflation. Inflation returns to the 2% target by the end of 2024 as global price pressures and domestic demand ease.

Inflation is forecast to ease, reflecting several forces. Oil prices are projected to fall gradually, with the Brent price back down to $100 by the end of 2024. Global supply bottlenecks abate, and the tightening of monetary policy abroad weighs on foreign demand. Consequently, inflation of tradable goods prices declines. 

Higher interest rates in Canada will soften demand, reducing domestic inflationary pressures. Inflation of services prices, including shelter price inflation, eases. Considerable uncertainty continues to surround this outlook, as has been the case throughout the pandemic.

The contraction in housing activity is expected to continue in the second half of 2022 and into 2023. Resales and house prices decline as borrowing rates rise and the pandemic-induced boost in demand wanes. Residential construction, including renovations, is also predicted to drop over the next year. Housing activity and prices are forecast to stabilize later in the projection horizon as both population and income growth boost housing demand.  

Consumption grows at a modest pace over the projection horizon. Spending on travel and other hard-to-distance services rises as consumers become less concerned about physical distancing. This will contribute to a rebalancing of the consumption of goods and services. A 
drawdown in some of the savings accumulated during the pandemic also supports household spending.5 For example, motor vehicle purchases are expected to pick up as supply shortages resolve and pent-up demand is met.

However, consumption growth is anticipated to slow from its current strong pace. High inflation means that households will allocate more of their disposable income to necessities such as food and gasoline, leaving them with less money to spend on other items. And higher interest rates mean that some households will postpone major purchases, pay down debt or save more. As well, some households—particularly those that took on a sizable mortgage when rates were lower—will face significantly larger payments when they renew their mortgages. The slowdown in housing activity will also weigh on the consumption of goods such as furniture and appliances. 

Export growth is expected to remain strong throughout the remainder of 2022, boosted by elevated commodity prices and a pickup in international travel. Later in the projection horizon, export growth slows as foreign demand declines.

Non-energy exports should grow solidly as global supply disruptions dissipate. However, exports of motor vehicles will slow growth in the second half of 2023 and in 2024 when some manufacturing facilities close temporarily to retool for the production of electric vehicles. Exports and imports of services strengthen and reach pre-pandemic levels in 2024 while international travel continues to recover.

Energy exports are projected to grow strongly due to high prices and increased transportation capacity. Expected expansions in pipeline capacity—including the Trans Mountain Expansion project—and in volumes of crude-by-rail will support growth later in the projection horizon.

Imports are anticipated to remain solid, backed by robust business investment, ongoing restocking by businesses, and firms’ desire to hold more inventory to buffer themselves against future supply disruptions.

Outside the oil and gas sector, the investment outlook is bolstered by solid demand, robust business confidence and a push to alleviate capacity constraints. This outlook is consistent with the results of the BOS, with firms planning investments in digital technologies to improve productivity given tight labour markets and high input costs.  

Investment growth in the oil and gas sector is anticipated to be robust, though more muted than during past periods of high prices. Producers of conventional oil and natural gas are expected to focus on expanding production capacity in fields where infrastructure is readily available. Investment in the oil sands is expected to be limited to improving the use of existing capacity and expanding current projects. Oil sands projects tend to require more capital and emit higher levels of greenhouse gases, making them sensitive to uncertainty about long-term demand and the transition to a low-carbon economy.

The global economy faces many challenges. The pace of monetary policy tightening has accelerated in many countries as inflationary pressures have continued to rise and broaden. These pressures are contributing to greater volatility in financial markets and growing concerns about the path for the global recovery. Also, even as disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic have continued to ease, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine remains a major source of uncertainty. 

Some of the risks identified in previous reports have been partially incorporated into the projection. The base-case scenario includes more persistent supply challenges, greater pass-through of cost increases, tighter global financial conditions and the impact of higher inflation expectations.

The Bank sees two main risks to the outlook for inflation. On the upside, if left unchecked, persistently high inflation could result in a wage-price spiral. On the downside, the slowdown in the global economy could be more severe than expected, especially if the US economy slows more than expected. 

Drawing from a larger set of risks, this section discusses other risks that may affect the projected path of inflation. The upside risks are of greater concern because inflation is persistently high, and evidence is mounting that expectations of inflation are drifting upward.

Until inflation drops significantly, the risk is greater that Canadians will believe it will stay high over the long term. Higher inflation expectations could lead to more pervasive increases in prices and labour costs, and these in turn could become embedded in higher inflation. Box 3 provides a scenario of what could happen if longer-term inflation expectations become de-anchored and a wage-price spiral takes hold. In this case, mutually reinforcing wage and price pressures would amplify high inflation, and a greater degree of monetary policy tightening and a more pronounced slowdown of the economy would be needed to bring inflation back to target. 

The global economy could slow more than anticipated. The euro area is at risk of recession as energy shortages lead to even higher prices, undermining consumer demand. Economy-wide disruptions could occur if rationing is implemented. At the same time, the impact of tighter financial conditions on household confidence and spending could be greater than expected. This could lead to slower growth in many regions. If more forceful actions are required to restrain inflation in the United States, US growth could slow more than projected. As well, lockdowns in China could be more frequent and have a larger negative impact on growth than currently assumed. These shocks would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through weaker foreign demand, lower commodity prices and a deterioration in the terms of trade.

In the base-case scenario, consumption grows at a modest pace and housing activity sees a sizable pullback. For many households, higher inflation and interest rates are squeezing budgets. However, a considerable proportion of households have accumulated large excess savings and are therefore more capable of absorbing higher prices. With the reopening of the economy, the boost from pent-up demand could be more sustained than anticipated if this group spends even more of its accumulated savings. Consumption and residential investment would then be stronger than projected and would contribute to greater inflationary pressures.

The base-case scenario assumes that the spike in goods prices since the beginning of the pandemic will persist. However, these prices could decline as supply chain bottlenecks dissipate and demand moderates. Oil prices and transportation costs could decrease more sharply than expected or growth in goods consumption could slow more than projected, particularly in the United States. If either of these scenarios occurs, inflation would be lower than projected.

Some large global retailers are reporting high levels of inventory after building up their stocks to avoid shortages. This could suggest some downside risk if retailers offer deep discounts to clear excess inventory.

While the base case projects a significant decline in housing activity, a steep drop in homebuyer sentiment could amplify the decline in house prices. Significant drops in house prices would reduce household wealth and access to credit as well as undermine consumer confidence. This would weigh on demand, especially from highly indebted households that have taken out sizable mortgages to purchase a home. Higher borrowing rates and reduced access to credit could also have larger-than-expected dampening effects on household spending, business investment and employment.
	