A robust economic recovery continued throughout the second half of 2021 in Canada and abroad. Taking into account the faster-than-expected growth and strong job gains, the Bank judges that economic slack is now essentially absorbed.

The Omicron variant of COVID-19 emerged in late autumn, triggering household cautiousness and public health measures. These are temporarily slowing economic activity globally. The economic impacts of Omicron in Canada will likely be limited by high vaccination rates and the continuing adaptability of businesses and households.
 
Disruptions to global supply chains have broadened and become more pronounced, pushing inflation higher in most advanced and emerging-market economies (EMEs). In response to inflationary pressures, some central banks have already raised their policy interest rates, and others have signalled they plan to do so.

Global economic activity recovered strongly in 2021. In the United States, the recovery has been robust, and the economy is now experiencing excess demand and particularly elevated inflation. Other regions have also made important progress, although most are still operating somewhat below capacity.

Inflation has risen around the world and is projected to peak by the first quarter of 2022 in most regions. High energy and food prices, as well as strong demand for goods amid widespread supply shortages and bottlenecks, have driven inflation up. Supply shortages are expected to dissipate gradually by the end of 2022. However, significant uncertainties remain about the resolution of these shortages, and the Omicron variant may lead to more disruptions in the near term.

The recovery is expected to continue over the projection horizon, despite some near-term weakness because of the emergence of the Omicron variant. Global growth is projected to moderate from 6¾% in 2021 to about 3½% in 2022 and 2023. The US economy is expected to continue growing 
at a robust pace, albeit with some moderation as policy support eases. Growth in China is expected to be restrained by weakness in the property sector and strict COVID-19 policies. Overall, the global growth outlook is weaker than it was in the October Report.

Government bond yields have risen in recent months in many countries, including Canada and the United States. This partly reflects market participants’ anticipation that policy interest rates will be raised earlier than previously expected. Despite this recent tightening, financial conditions remain broadly accommodative. Corporate bond spreads and the Can$/US$ exchange rate are close to their levels at the time of the October Report. However, global equity prices have recently declined owing to the combination of higher expected interest rates and increased geopolitical tensions. 

Gross domestic product (GDP) growth rebounded at the end of 2021 after a period of soft activity associated with the spread of the Delta variant at the end of the summer. The labour market tightened considerably in the fourth quarter, as demonstrated by the decline in the unemployment rate and the elevated number of job vacancies. Aggregate measures of wage growth have increased, particularly in industries that reopened quickly, such as leisure and hospitality.  

Bottlenecks at ports and global shortages of various goods will likely continue to curb production and push prices up. However, shipping costs seem to have plateaued, and some progress has been made on alleviating congestion at ports. Supply disruptions are anticipated to decline over 2022.

US GDP growth is projected to moderate from 5½% in 2021 to about 3¾% in 2022 and 2½% in 2023, as policy stimulus is withdrawn. Consumption is anticipated to remain solid in 2022 and 2023, supported by a strong labour market and households spending some of the savings they accumulated during the pandemic. The projection also incorporates the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and other spending on research and development totalling US$1.5 trillion over eight years starting in 2022. 

Total and core measures of US personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation remain high and are expected to peak at 5.7% and 5.0%, respectively, in the first quarter of 2022.1 Past increases in energy prices and continued supply bottlenecks amid high demand for goods have been important contributors to inflationary pressures. The effects of energy and supply shortages are anticipated to decline, gradually leading to a moderation in inflation over the course of the year. However, with the economy expected to remain in excess demand, PCE inflation is anticipated to stay above 2% over the projection horizon, reaching 2.4% at the end of 2023.

Growth in the euro area is estimated to have slowed in late 2021, following the reintroduction of targeted restrictions in many countries in response to rising COVID-19 cases. The new wave of health and travel restrictions will likely be short-lived and the recovery is expected to continue, with growth gradually moderating in 2022 and 2023. 

Euro area inflation, as measured by the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP), reached 5% in December. Most components of HICP have risen over the past year. However, a large part of the increase in inflation reflects high energy prices and past changes to the German value-added tax. Inflation is expected to ease over the projection horizon as the effects of these two factors dissipate.

Growth in China is expected to slow to only 3¾% in 2022 as the property sector continues to adjust. Strict containment measures—particularly in light of the Omicron variant—continue to be a drag on the economy. Past tightening of regulations in the property sector has prompted a decline in housing activity that will likely be an important drag on growth in 2022. As a 
result, some property developers are experiencing financial distress. Other regulatory changes in a wide range of sectors, including technology and education, are also projected to weigh on domestic demand. 

In response to the economic slowdown, Chinese authorities have modestly increased policy support. Growth is projected to recover to about 5¼% in 2023 as the drag on growth from the property sector diminishes. Uncertainty about both the impact of China’s “zero-COVID” policy and the fragility of the property sector remains high. Either of these factors could dampen growth by more than expected over the projection horizon.

After a strong recovery in 2021, growth is expected to slow in 2022 and 2023 in oil-importing EMEs and in the rest-of-the world group. Many countries have tightened monetary policy in response to increased inflationary pressures. Higher interest rates will weigh on economic activity, particularly in Latin America, Russia and emerging Europe. Growth in some EMEs may also be affected by low vaccination rates and renewed measures to contain COVID-19 outbreaks.

Oil prices have experienced significant volatility since the October Report. They initially fell sharply as the emergence of the Omicron variant increased uncertainty. With the economic impacts of Omicron now looking less severe than initially feared, prices have recovered. Concerns 
about global energy supply and heightened geopolitical tensions have also contributed to the rebound in oil prices. Over the projection horizon, the per-barrel prices of Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canadian Select oil are assumed to be US$80, US$75 and US$65, respectively, the same levels as in the October Report.
 
Prices could stay above the flat oil price assumption if global energy shortages were to continue. Oil prices could also fall below this assumption if members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some non-OPEC oil producers, including the United States, were to significantly increase production. The severity and persistence of the Omicron variant also remains a downside risk.

The Canadian economy experienced a strong rebound through the second half of 2021. Economic growth surged as the easing of public health measures boosted consumption of services, and exports bounced back due to growing foreign demand.  

The unexpected arrival of the highly infectious Omicron variant is causing renewed hardship for many. It also serves as a reminder that the evolution of the pandemic remains uncertain. The sharp increase in the number of cases and the imposition of related public health measures are slowing activity at the start of 2022, but robust growth should resume in the second quarter. The combination of high vaccination rates and improved adaptability of businesses and consumers limits the downside economic risks from this wave of the pandemic. 

Labour conditions are strong. The labour market had recovered to pre-pandemic levels by the end of 2021. The employment rate has fully recovered when accounting for demographic change, firms are having difficulty finding workers, and wage growth is rising. Omicron is leading to some temporary job losses in hard-to-distance sectors and to a spike in worker absences more broadly, but these effects are expected to be short-lived. 

Faced with robust demand, many Canadian businesses are experiencing challenges due to supply constraints. Transportation bottlenecks, labour shortages and difficulty sourcing key inputs are resulting in reduced hours of operation, production slowdowns and delayed or cancelled sales. The overall effects of these supply disruptions are estimated to have been larger, broader and more persistent than initially anticipated. Exports and business investment have been particularly affected, as has consumer spending on some durable goods such as motor vehicles.   

The outlook is for strong growth over the projection horizon as demand remains robust and supply recovers from the effects of the pandemic, with disruptions expected to ease gradually through 2022. Overall, growth is forecast to be around 4% in 2022 and 3.5% in 2023, supported by household spending on services, exports and investment. This growth forecast is slightly weaker than in the October Report.
 
Consumer price index (CPI) inflation is forecast to remain close to 5% over the first half of 2022. This is due to supply constraints coinciding with high energy prices and rising food costs. CPI inflation is anticipated to ease to about 3% by the end of 2022 as these pressures dissipate. Inflation is then expected to decline to around 2¼% by the second half of 2023 and remain close to the target in 2024. 
	
Growth was robust in the second half of 2021, at around 5½%. It is expected to moderate to about 2% in the first quarter. The Omicron variant and its related supply disruptions are expected to temporarily weigh on hard-to-distance services such as travel and indoor dining, with the effects mitigated by governments extending their support programs. Elevated worker absences due to the rise in cases are anticipated to temporarily affect a broader range of industries. Strong growth is expected to resume later in the first quarter. 

Housing market activity has strengthened again in recent months, led by a rebound in resales. Low borrowing rates and high disposable incomes are continuing to contribute to elevated levels of housing activity in the first quarter. At the same time, other factors that support demand, such as population growth, are also now picking up.    
 
Supply constraints continue to weigh on spending and production. This can be seen, for example, in delays in the delivery of key inputs used by manufacturers. Despite these near-term challenges, solid foreign demand and improving business confidence should continue to support 
robust growth in business investment and exports. 

Employment growth has been robust in recent months. The unemployment rate is only 0.3 percentage points higher than it was in February 2020. Labour force participation rates are at or above pre-pandemic levels for most age groups, and job postings are at near-record levels. The Omicron wave is weighing temporarily on employment in hard-to-distance sectors. The expected short duration of restrictions should limit the impact on the labour market.

In the Bank’s Business Outlook Survey (BOS) for the fourth quarter of 2021, about 40% of firms reported that labour shortages are restricting their ability to meet demand—a level not seen since 2007. Moreover, most of these firms expect the shortages to persist until at least 2023.

Wage growth is picking up, partly due to the need to attract employees. Given a greater number of job openings, many workers can more easily find higher-paying jobs that better fit their skills, and this should boost productivity. 

Labour productivity growth has been weak amid broader labour market gains. Supply shortages, restrictions on the number of customers being served and slack in hard-to-distance services, such as travel, are likely contributing to this weakness. As pandemic-related supply disruptions abate and business investment strengthens, labour productivity growth should increase. 

The absorption of economic slack in the second half of 2021 was faster than expected in the October Report. At that time, output and employment growth were projected to be strong, but the recovery has been even more robust. This is due to a surge in services consumption, strong growth in exports and the addition of almost 800,000 jobs since May. At the same time, supply 
has been revised down since October because of further bottlenecks and shortages related to the pandemic. Businesses have also reported that they increasingly face capacity constraints as they try to meet elevated demand. 

Consequently, a broad set of measures—including labour market indicators, surveys on business sentiment and measures of core inflation—suggest that economic slack is now absorbed (Box 3). Taking the respective demand and supply pressures into account, the Bank estimates that the output gap narrowed to between -0.75% and 0.25% in the fourth quarter of 2021. 

CPI inflation is forecast to average close to 5% in the first half of 2022. Inflation is elevated because of higher prices for durable goods, energy and food.

Durable goods prices are being pushed up by global supply chain disruptions, while Canadian energy prices are higher because of elevated global oil and natural gas prices. At the same time, last year’s drought and ongoing supply challenges are contributing to higher food prices. The result is that goods price inflation has reached nearly 7%, well above the previous 10-year average of roughly 1%. Taken together, energy prices and components subject to supply constraints are currently adding nearly 4 percentage points to inflation. 

Services price inflation, which is affected by both domestic and external forces, has risen to nearly 3.5%. The increase is led by escalating construction costs due to higher prices for building materials and labour shortages. As a result of these factors, price pressures have broadened across CPI components. Close to 55% of CPI components are now growing at more than 3%, well above the historical average of 30%.  
 
Core measures of inflation have edged higher since October, with CPI-trim and CPI-median at 3.7% and 3.0%, respectively. CPI-common has remained more muted at 2.1% because it attaches less importance to some components that have seen the largest price changes, such as motor vehicles. In contrast, some components with high weights—such as local transportation and health care goods—have experienced less intense price pressures.

Economic growth is projected to be robust and more balanced, averaging 3¾% over 2022 and 2023, supported by strong domestic and foreign demand. As supply shortages ease and COVID-19 restrictions are removed, GDP will grow faster than employment, and output per worker will rise. Together with robust business investment and higher immigration, this increase in labour productivity will increase supply growth and should support economic growth without putting additional pressure on inflation. 

Consumption growth is forecast to be strong over the projection horizon, supported by job gains. Consumption should also be boosted by improving confidence and some spending of accumulated savings. 

Beyond the first quarter of 2022, spending on hard-to-distance services is expected to increase further as cautiousness around the pandemic fades. Purchases that have been delayed—for goods such as motor vehicles and appliances—will also increase as supply disruptions ease. 

Housing market activity is anticipated to remain elevated but ease from its current levels. Resales should be dampened by the fading of the pandemic-induced boost in demand, reduced support from accumulated savings, and borrowing rates that are now above their pandemic lows. Meanwhile, the easing of supply chain disruptions should support residential construction over 2022. The resulting growth in supply combined with easing demand should help rebalance housing markets and contribute to a moderation in house price growth.

Export growth is projected to be robust in 2022, boosted by solid foreign demand and elevated commodity prices. It then moderates, along with US growth, in 2023. Goods exports, excluding energy, will also be supported by the dissipation of global supply disruptions. 

Services exports are anticipated to strengthen as international travel recovers. The recovery is expected to take time given the slow return of international tourism. Over the long term, the overall level of international travel may also be negatively affected by new ways of working and efforts to address climate change. 

Relatively high prices for oil and natural gas are projected to support energy exports. Growth in energy exports is expected to be strong in 2022. It then eases in 2023 as expansions of oil sands production slow. With the addition of the Trans Mountain Expansion, transportation capacity should be sufficient to accommodate rising oil exports for several years.

As supply chain issues ease, strong domestic demand and firms’ desire to invest and rebuild inventories should support the recovery in goods imports.

Robust business investment is expected after a period of pandemic-related weakness. Outside the oil and gas sector, firms are expected to increase their investment in the face of growing domestic and foreign demand, improved business confidence, limited production capacity and the gradual easing of supply constraints. The BOS for the fourth quarter of 2021 revealed broad-based strength in investment intentions.

Investment in the oil and gas sector is anticipated to increase but remain below pre-pandemic levels. Despite relatively elevated price levels, long-term investments, such as those in the oil sands, will likely remain subdued given high uncertainty about future demand. In contrast, shorter-term investments, such as conventional oil and gas wells, are expected to rise.

Inventory investment is projected to contribute to growth as businesses rebuild their inventories following unprecedented drawdowns in 2020 and ongoing delivery delays.

As pandemic-related forces fade, inflation is forecast to ease over the second half of 2022 and into early 2023. Upward pressure from supply shortages is expected to diminish over 2022. Under the assumption that oil prices remain flat, the boost from higher gasoline prices should also fade in the coming quarters. This expected easing can be seen in the evolution of annualized quarter-over-quarter inflation rates, which fall from around 4¾% in the first quarter of 2022 to about 2¼% by the fourth quarter of 2022. Year-over-year inflation is projected to decline from about 5% in early 2022 to about 3% by the end of 2022 as these pressures dissipate. Inflation is then expected to decline to around 2¼% by the second half of 2023 and remain close to the target in 2024.

Businesses and consumers view price pressures as elevated over the next two years. Most respondents to both the BOS and the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations for the fourth quarter of 2021 anticipate inflation to be above 3% on average over the next two years. 

Despite this rise in expected inflation, longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. Most firms that responded to the recent BOS expect inflation to return close to the 2% target in one to three years. 

Private sector forecasters have increased their expectations for inflation over the next year, but their longer-term expectations have remained stable. The October 2021 Consensus Economics forecast continues to show an average of 2% over the next 10 years. In addition, while the 5- and 10-year Canadian break-even inflation rates are now somewhat above pre-pandemic levels, they are well aligned with the 2% inflation target.

In November 2021, in light of the progress made in the economic recovery, the Bank ended its program of quantitative easing (QE) and entered the reinvestment phase. In this phase, the Bank purchases Government of Canada bonds solely to replace maturing bonds and maintain the stimulus provided by previous QE purchases. At present, this requires approximately $4 billion to $5 billion in purchases per month (or about $1 billion per week) across both the primary and secondary markets. These purchases keep the Bank’s holdings of Government of Canada bonds roughly constant at around $435 billion. This amount currently represents 87% of the Bank’s total assets. The rest of the balance sheet largely reflects assets acquired early in the pandemic to keep markets functioning. Most of the assets acquired then have already matured and rolled off the Bank’s balance sheet, and the remainder will do so over time.

Uncertainty around the projection remains unusually high. The outlook continues to depend on how the COVID-19 pandemic evolves, most notably the spread of variants. The pandemic will continue to weigh on confidence and disrupt supply for some time, posing both upward and downward risks to inflation. While high vaccination rates in Canada have diminished the likelihood of a severe downturn, the reopening of the economy remains complex. Pervasive supply constraints will need to unwind. Moreover, the work routines and spending habits of households are shifting. Consequently, the evolution of supply and demand and its effects on inflation are particularly uncertain.

Some of the risks identified in previous reports have been partially incorporated into the projection. For example, the base-case scenario includes a short-lived negative impact from the Omicron variant as well as more widespread inflationary pressures from supply-side disruptions.

While the upside and downside risks to the Bank’s inflation projection are viewed as roughly balanced, the upside risks are of greater concern. Until inflation moves significantly lower, there is an elevated risk that Canadians will start to believe that inflation will stay high over the long term. Higher inflation expectations could in turn lead to more pervasive labour costs and inflationary pressures and could become embedded in ongoing inflation.

Drawing from a larger set of risks, this section presents a selection of those identified as most important for the projected path of inflation.

The emergence of the Omicron variant is a reminder that the evolution of the pandemic remains uncertain. The pandemic’s effects on business sentiment, household confidence and economic activity may be more severe and persistent than assumed in the projection. For instance, COVID-19 variants could induce a longer-lasting drag on confidence and delay the recovery in hard-to-distance service sectors.

The spread of COVID-19 variants could further disrupt manufacturing and shipping activities, causing longer-lasting shortages of goods and labour. It could also delay the rebalancing of consumption from goods to services. A continued preference for goods consumption would exacerbate congestion in already stretched supply chains. Moreover, repeated disruptions to business operations may lead firms to adjust their supply chains in ways that could increase costs. More persistent labour shortages could also result in greater wage pressures. Taken together, these effects would lead to more persistent inflationary pressures.

Pandemic-induced shifts in consumption patterns and disruptions in supply have pushed prices of goods higher. The base-case scenario assumes that these price increases faced by consumers do not reverse. However, the rebalancing of consumption from goods to services could occur faster than assumed in the projection. Combined with an expansion of transportation capacity and efforts to improve logistics, these developments could resolve supply chain disruptions faster than expected and cause some prices to decline. If this occurred, inflation would be weaker than projected. For example, in a scenario with a 30% reversal of these pandemic-induced effects on 
prices, inflation falls more quickly, declining to slightly below 2% in 
2023.

The projection continues to include some degree of caution around consumption. However, over time, a reduction in pandemic-related uncertainty could boost confidence by more than expected. Consequently, households could spend more of their accumulated savings. Consumption and residential investment would then be stronger than projected and would contribute to greater inflationary pressures.

With high levels of global indebtedness and elevated equity valuations, a pullback in risk appetite could trigger a sharp tightening of global financial conditions. Increased inflationary pressures and the associated uncertainty surrounding how soon advanced economies will reduce monetary policy stimulus could trigger capital outflows, especially from some EMEs. Such outflows would create financial stress, leading to slower growth. In addition, efforts by Chinese authorities to address vulnerabilities and engineer a soft landing in the property sector could weigh on growth more than expected. These shocks could have negative spillover effects on the global economy and would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through weaker 
exports, lower commodity prices and a deterioration in the terms of trade.
