Global inflation is coming down, but core inflation in major economies is proving to be persistent. Central banks continue to see the need to maintain restrictive monetary policy to achieve their inflation targets.

This restrictive monetary policy and, to a much lesser extent, stress in the banking sector are anticipated to constrain global growth through 2023 and the first half of 2024. Growth is then projected to pick up in 2025 as the effects of policy tightening fade. 

In Canada, consumer price index (CPI) inflation is expected to come down quickly to around 3% in the middle of 2023 and then decline more gradually, reaching the 2% target by the end of 2024.

Goods price inflation is easing quickly, reflecting lower energy prices, improved global supply chains and the effects of restrictive monetary policy on sectors sensitive to interest rates. Inflation is then forecast to return the rest of the way to the 2% target more gradually because services price inflation is responding more slowly to the effects of restrictive monetary policy.

Demand in Canada still exceeds supply, and the labour market remains tight. Although the slowing economy and increasing labour supply are helping relieve some of this tightness, the labour market is still above maximum sustainable employment. 

Economic growth is expected to be subdued through the remainder of this year, with the economy moving into excess supply in the second half, and then to pick up gradually through 2024. 

Strong population growth is supporting aggregate consumption and employment growth. Household spending is being restrained by higher interest rates. At current interest rates, the share of income spent on interest payments will continue to rise as homeowners renew their mortgages. Growth in business investment and exports is also expected to soften, reflecting increased borrowing costs and weaker foreign demand.

With slow growth in Canada for the next several quarters, the Bank of Canada anticipates near-term inflation expectations to decline, services price inflation and wage growth to moderate, and the pricing behaviour of businesses to normalize. As these things happen, domestic price pressures will ease further, returning inflation gradually to the 2% target. 

On an annual average basis, growth in gross domestic product (GDP) in Canada is projected to be 1.4% this year and 1.3% in 2024. As the economy adjusts to higher interest rates and inflation returns to the 2% target, GDP growth is projected to pick back up in 2025, reaching 2.5%.
	
Inflation has fallen from its 2022 peak in most regions. However, core measures of inflation and, in particular, services price inflation remain high in many countries. Major central banks continue to communicate the need to maintain restrictive monetary policy to achieve their inflation targets.

Volatility in financial markets increased sharply after the recent banking sector stress in the United States and Europe. Authorities reacted swiftly to limit the effects of this stress on the global financial system. Even so, credit conditions have tightened modestly, and the potential for further stress has increased uncertainty.  

Global growth is expected to weaken through the second half of 2023 to the first half of 2024, weighed down by restrictive monetary policy in advanced economies. To a lesser extent, headwinds coming from tighter credit conditions are also anticipated to restrain growth in the United States and Europe. In contrast, the lifting of most COVID‑19 restrictions in China is leading to a rebound in activity in 2023 that supports global growth and demand for commodities. Overall, global growth averages about 2.4% over 2023 and 2024. Growth is then projected to pick up to 2.8% in 2025.

Global growth in 2023 has been revised up since the January Report due to stronger economic activity in nearly all regions, despite restrictive monetary policy and the negative impact of tighter credit conditions in the United States and Europe. Growth in 2024 is revised down due to further tightening of monetary policy in advanced economies as well as banking sector stress since the January Report.

The Bank expects inflation in most advanced economies to decline meaningfully over 2023, mostly due to easing inflation in goods prices. In contrast, services price inflation is projected to stay elevated for longer. Over time, monetary policy tightening is anticipated to reduce demand for services, soften employment and better align growth in labour costs with productivity. By the end of the projection horizon, inflation is forecast to be near central bank targets. 

Goods price inflation is declining in most advanced economies. This reflects improvements in supply chains and lower energy prices. Demand for goods is also slowing due to past increases in interest rates and a shift in spending patterns back toward high-contact services. These 
dynamics are expected to continue, with falling goods price inflation accounting for most of the anticipated decline in inflation across advanced economies in 2023.

Services price inflation, however, continues to be elevated and is projected to decline more slowly. Demand for services is strong, and labour markets in the United States and the euro area remain tight. Results from a survey by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond indicate that firms in the United States expect services price inflation to be around 4% over the near term. 

By the end of this year, inflation is projected to remain well above central bank targets. Further declines in inflation will largely depend on how quickly growth in services prices slows.

Credit conditions have tightened in some regions since the January Report. In early March, deposit runs at Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank led the US Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to take control of both banks and offer extraordinary support to their depositors. Soon after, Credit Suisse came under severe market stress, and the Swiss authorities responded by facilitating a takeover by UBS. 

In the past, prolonged episodes of stress in the banking sector have typically led to decreased credit issuance in the primary market and wider credit spreads for financial institutions. This made bank funding more expensive, which caused banks to tighten lending conditions. 

Recently, funding costs for US banks have increased, and concerns exist that conditions could deteriorate further. Consequently, some pullback in lending is expected, particularly at US regional banks, which play an important role in lending to small businesses.

Credit risk spreads also widened sharply in mid-March. This tightening was partially offset by a fall in long-term government bond yields. More recently, financial markets have largely stabilized, and many indicators of financial conditions have improved. 

The Can$/US$ exchange rate is broadly unchanged since the January Report.

Economic growth in the United States has been stronger than expected in the January Report. However, US growth is projected to slow sharply in the second quarter of 2023 and to stall through the first quarter of 2024. Weak growth over this period is largely due to the tightening in both monetary policy and, to a lesser extent, credit conditions. 

Over the projection horizon, components of US activity important for 
Canadian exports are anticipated to grow more slowly than US GDP for the 
following reasons.
	
US consumers are expected to moderate their spending on goods to a greater extent than on services. This reflects two factors. First, after surging early in the pandemic, the share of household income spent on goods is projected to decline. Second, increases in interest rates will have a larger effect on the consumption of goods than of services. These 
developments disproportionately affect US demand for Canadian products because non-commodity exports from Canada are geared more toward goods than services. 
	
US firms are anticipated to significantly reduce investment spending on equipment—a key determinant of Canadian exports. 

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine continues to greatly affect the euro area economy. Disruptions to energy supplies have dampened production in the manufacturing sector. Elevated inflation is eroding purchasing power and weighing on household demand.

Warmer-than-normal weather this winter and new supplies of non-Russian natural gas improved the outlook for the supply of energy in Europe, and this has boosted consumer and business confidence. Unemployment is also low across the euro area. 

Nevertheless, rising interest rates are expected to reduce demand and ease inflation toward the European Central Bank’s target over the projection horizon. Economic growth is forecast to remain below potential until the second half of 2024 and then pick up.

Growth in economic activity in China is anticipated to be robust in the first half of 2023. Domestic demand has been strengthening since the lifting of most COVID‑19 restrictions, with services such as air travel showing signs of a strong recovery. While residential investment has picked up recently, past overbuilding and past regulatory tightening are still expected to constrain activity in the property sector. Fiscal and monetary policy remain accommodative. 

The pace of economic growth is projected to slow in the second half of 2023 as the effects of reopening the economy dissipate. An ongoing decline in the working-age population weighs on economic activity in 2024 and 2025.
	
After recent volatility, global oil prices have returned to the levels observed at the time of the January Report. Stress in the banking sector caused a sharp fall in oil prices in early March. Later improvements in financial conditions partly offset this decline.Prices have rebounded further after several members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting 
Countries (OPEC) and some non-OPEC oil producers announced plans to cut production. 

Consequently, the Bank’s assumption for global oil prices is the same as in the January Report. The price for Brent oil is assumed to be US$85 per barrel, while the price for West Texas Intermediate (WTI) is assumed to be US$80. 

Since the January Report, the discount on Western Canadian Select (WCS) over WTI has declined to around US$15 per barrel. WCS prices have risen because seasonal maintenance has slowed production in Canada. At the same time, US refinery outages have eased, and releases of oil from the US Strategic Petroleum Reserve have largely concluded.

Prices for natural gas have dropped further in both North America and Europe in response to the mild winter. Concerns about shortages of natural gas in Europe have eased, and Europe is now expected to enter next winter with an adequate level of reserves. 

The Bank’s non-energy commodity price index is modestly lower than in the January Report. Prices for base metals have fallen because demand from the Chinese construction sector did not strengthen as much as markets had anticipated. Lumber prices have also declined, reflecting a further weakening in US housing activity. Agricultural prices remain largely unchanged.

CPI inflation in Canada remains too high but continues to decline from recent peaks because of falling energy prices and smaller price increases for other goods. As expected at the time of the January Report, inflation declined in February, reaching 5.2%.

Ongoing excess demand in the economy and a still-tight labour market continue to exert upward pressure on domestic prices.

Economic growth is anticipated to slow from 3.4% in 2022 to 1.4% in 2023 and 1.3% in 2024. After a bounceback in the first quarter of 2023, quarterly growth is expected to be weak through the rest of the year. It then picks up gradually through 2024. Restrictive monetary policy continues to weigh on household spending and business investment, and weak foreign demand restrains export growth.

At the same time, strong population growth is boosting aggregate consumption spending as well as adding to labour supply. Economic growth picks up in 2025, reaching 2.5% as foreign demand strengthens and the effects of past monetary policy tightening fade.

The Bank still expects CPI inflation to come down to around 3% in the middle of 2023. Goods price inflation is falling due to past declines in gasoline prices, improvements in global supply chains and moderating effects of high interest rates on global demand. In contrast, shelter price inflation is still high. Inflation in the prices of many other services also remains elevated. This   reflects the strength in the demand for services as households catch up on what they missed during the pandemic as well as ongoing tightness in the labour market.  

CPI inflation returns to the 2% target at the end of 2024. As high interest rates slow demand and supply grows, the economy moves into modest excess supply in the second half of 2023. Pressures in domestic product and labour markets begin to ease. Price and wage growth moderates, while productivity growth picks up. Services price inflation gradually eases as it responds more slowly to the effects of restrictive monetary policy.

CPI inflation is declining largely as expected, reaching 5.2% in February. The most important contribution to the decline has been the fall in energy prices. Inflation for prices of goods excluding food and energy has also come down modestly. In contrast, inflation for food purchased from stores remains elevated, staying just above 10%. Historical experience suggests that the recent easing of cost pressures in production and distribution will lead to declines in food price inflation over the coming months.

Three-month CPI inflation has fallen to about 1.6%. This suggests that headline inflation will continue to drop in the near term.

Core inflation has eased slightly, to just below 5%. With measures of three-month core inflation around 3.5%, core inflation is expected to decline in the coming months. 

Nonetheless, core inflation remains well above CPI inflation on a three-month basis. Much of the additional strength comes from inflation in core services excluding shelter, which has been more persistent in recent months than inflation in overall services excluding shelter. For CPI inflation to return sustainably to the 2% target, core inflation will need to come down further. 

Inflation expectations of firms, consumers and professional forecasters have edged down according to recent surveys. Moreover, results from the Business Outlook Survey (BOS) for the first quarter of 2023 indicate that views about inflation have continued to decline. Fewer respondents expect inflation over the next two years to be in the 5% to 6% range and more expect it to be in the 2% to 3% range when compared with the previous surveys.

Nevertheless, most respondents to business and consumer surveys still think that CPI inflation will be higher than the Bank’s inflation forecast over the next two years. For instance, expectations of BOS respondents remain centred around the 3% to 4% range. Long-term inflation expectations remain consistent with the 2% target.

The pace of economic activity in Canada has slowed since mid-2022, but demand still exceeds supply. Overall, the estimate of the output gap—the difference between GDP and potential output—is between 0.25% and 1.25% in the first quarter of 2023. 

The labour market remains tight, and a broad range of indicators suggest that it is still above maximum sustainable employment. Employment gains reported in Statistics Canada’s Labour Force Survey have been stronger than expected, with more than 205,000 net new jobs created in the first three months of 2023.

The steady increase in labour input indicates that strong labour demand has continued, but labour supply has also greatly expanded. As noted in the January Report, increases in child care subsidies and more flexible work arrangements have contributed to rising labour force participation rates among women. Moreover, strong inflows of permanent and non-permanent residents have led to a large increase in the labour force. In particular, businesses have considerably broadened their use of the Temporary Foreign Worker Program.

Tightening monetary policy is moderating the demand for labour in industries where demand is the most sensitive to interest rates. Respondents to the BOS note that it has become easier to find the workers they need. Firms attribute this to less competition for labour and improved labour supply. 

Most wage growth measures remain around the 4% to 5% range, with increases broadly based across sectors. In recent business surveys, firms expect the pace of wage growth to slow over the coming year, although the size of their planned wage increases is still above the historical average. Unless a surprisingly strong pickup in productivity growth occurs, sustained 4% to 5% wage growth is not consistent with achieving the 2% inflation target.

Businesses continue to report capacity constraints, including some labour shortages and supply chain challenges, which weigh on production and sales. Nevertheless, firms are reporting an easing in capacity pressures from exceptionally high levels last year. 

After a weaker-than-expected fourth quarter in 2022, real GDP is estimated to have picked up to 2.3% in the first quarter of 2023. For the rest of the year, growth is forecast to be weak, averaging less than 1%.

Increases in interest rates in Canada are weighing on growth in domestic demand. At the same time, high interest rates—and, to a lesser degree, US regional bank stress—are limiting demand for Canadian exports. 

In contrast, strong population growth supports household spending. Increases in population from immigration and temporary residents are a source of both supply and demand. This means that the economy may be able to grow at a somewhat faster pace than previously expected without generating additional inflationary pressures. 

Overall, with demand growth falling below potential output growth, the economy moves into modest excess supply in the second half of 2023.

In 2024, GDP growth is projected to pick up gradually, reaching 2.5% in 2025 as foreign demand strengthens and the effects of high interest rates on growth fade.

Potential output growth is assumed to average about 2% over the projection horizon, reflecting solid growth in trend labour input and a rebound in trend labour productivity. The labour force expands robustly due to strong immigration and an influx of temporary residents. This more than offsets the drag from an aging population.

Growth in overall government spending was robust in the second half of 2022, averaging 3.5% when adjusted for inflation. Recent provincial and federal budgets suggest that government spending will moderate to around 2.5% in the first half of 2023 and then slow to near the pace of potential growth. Over the projection horizon, government spending will contribute 
steadily to GDP growth, with the biggest contribution coming from provincial spending.  

Government transfers are also expected to remain elevated in the near term, supporting household spending. In particular, the $2.5 billion temporary extension to the goods and services tax credit provides targeted support to low-income households to offset the impact of high inflation on their budgets. In addition, tax cuts in some provinces will boost disposable income throughout the projection horizon. For instance, provincial tax reductions in Quebec for the two lowest income brackets will provide about $1.7 billion annually to Quebec households starting in 2023.

Roughly $25 billion per year in additional fiscal measures is added to the projection compared with the January Report. 

Consumer spending is anticipated to be subdued beginning in the second half of 2023 and into 2024 as the effects of the tightening in monetary policy work their way through the economy. Household spending is affected through several channels.  

The first channel is the impact on debt-servicing costs. This is a key channel given the high level of household debt. The effective interest rate on household debt is estimated to have risen to 5.5% in the first quarter of 2023. Interest payments rose to $133 billion on an annual basis in the fourth quarter of 2022, 45% higher than one year earlier. The share of income spent on interest payments will continue to rise as homeowners renew their mortgages. 
	
The second channel is that elevated interest rates are raising the cost of financing purchases of big-ticket items. Most respondents to the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations (CSCE) for the first quarter of 2023 indicated that, in response, they expect to postpone major purchases and cut back spending more generally. As the effects of high interest rates continue to work their way through the economy, spending on services will also be affected. For instance, some CSCE respondents expect to reduce their discretionary spending—such as on travel and restaurant meals—over the next 12 months compared with the previous 12 months.

Lastly, low consumer confidence and reduced wealth are also expected to restrain household spending this year. 

In contrast, government transfers will continue to support household spending. Strong population growth, though slower than in recent quarters, will provide a significant boost to aggregate consumption spending throughout the projection.

Growth in consumption is expected to pick up gradually over 2024 as the drag from monetary policy wanes and wealth recovers. The savings rate is anticipated to remain above its pre-pandemic average because of elevated interest rates and precautionary savings.

Housing activity has been weak (Chart 15). The Bank expects that it will stabilize around the middle of the year. Growth in residential investment is anticipated to resume in the second half of 2023. Strong demand from immigration should support housing activity over the projection horizon.

After surging early in 2023, exports are expected to stall over the rest of the year, reflecting the weakness in foreign demand. Export growth is anticipated to pick up over 2024. The outlook for exports reflects differing trajectories for non-commodity and commodity exports.

Non-commodity exports are projected to decline through 2024. This reflects waning foreign demand and fewer exports of motor vehicles as manufacturing facilities retool their plants to produce electric vehicles. The ongoing recovery in international travel and other services exports partially offsets these factors. Non-commodity exports are forecast to pick up over 2025.

In contrast, commodity exports are expected to be strong over the projection. Growth in energy exports should stay robust in the near term due to elevated oil prices. The completion of the Trans Mountain Expansion project in 2024 also supports this growth. For non-energy commodity exports, growth is boosted in the near term due to improved global supply chains. However, it slows later in the projection because of anticipated weak foreign demand.

Import growth and domestic demand growth are both forecast to slow by the middle of 2024, but import growth picks up later as the economy strengthens.

Business investment is expected to stall through mid-2024, dampened by slow demand growth and rising financing costs. Growth is also moderated by the completion of large infrastructure projects for energy transportation in mid-2023. Business investment is projected to strengthen over 2024 and 2025.

Slowing demand and high financing costs dampen the outlook for business investment outside the oil and gas sector. According to results from business surveys, many firms have already reduced, or plan to reduce, their capital expenditures. They often mention elevated borrowing costs and tight credit conditions—as well as the negative implications of these for economic activity—as key reasons for this decision. 

Business investment outside the oil and gas sector is anticipated to pick up in 2024, led by the diminishing impact of high interest rates and improving demand conditions. Strengthening business investment supports potential output over the projection horizon through its effect on capital accumulation.

In the oil and gas sector, investment growth is projected to slow significantly as the transition to a low-carbon economy weakens prospects for oil demand over the long term. Uncertainty about the expansion of energy transportation capacity beyond ongoing projects also weighs on firms’ investment intentions in that sector.

After a period of volatility, inventory investment is expected to stabilize somewhat and contribute little to growth over the projection horizon. However, the ratio of inventory to sales remains elevated because firms are keeping higher inventory levels in part to manage supply chain risk.

CPI inflation is forecast to decline quickly to about 3% in the middle of 2023, largely due to falling gasoline prices and weakening inflation in goods excluding food and energy. The latter results from slow growth in global demand, improvements in the performance of supply chains and a decline in the costs of some materials. At the same time, inflation in shelter 
prices is expected to remain high. Inflation in the prices of many other services is also projected to stay elevated, partly reflecting the delayed pickup in demand for these services compared with demand for goods. 

Respondents to the BOS continue to report they expect pressures on their input and output prices will be less intense in the future than they were in the previous 12 months. They anticipate a slower pace of price growth due to lower commodity prices, improved supply chains and softer demand conditions. Businesses also expect the size and pace of price changes to decline, which suggests that their price-setting behaviour is starting to shift 
closer to their pre-pandemic practices.

Inflation is subsequently projected to decline slowly from 3% to reach 2% at the end of 2024. This more gradual decline in CPI inflation reflects the slower response in services prices to tighter monetary conditions. The Canadian economy is projected to move into modest excess supply only in the second half of 2023. As pressures in domestic product and labour markets ease, wage and price growth moderate while productivity growth picks up. Short-term inflation expectations are also projected to decline steadily. As a result, inflation in services prices slows gradually.

The inflation outlook is subject to considerable uncertainty.

Risks to the inflation outlook have evolved since the January Report, but many of the risks identified in past reports remain important. Although the Bank views these risks as roughly balanced, the upside risks are of greater concern because inflation is still too high.

Canadian services price inflation remains high, and its persistence is the main upside risk over the projection. Unit labour cost growth in the services sector may be higher and more persistent than projected, which could occur if the labour market remains tight or if productivity growth remains weak. Elevated services price inflation could also last longer if elevated near-term inflation expectations prove to be more persistent than projected.  

Some additional risks identified in the January Report are also still relevant. If the recovery in China is stronger than expected or new developments restrict the global supply of oil, energy prices could increase sharply, pushing CPI inflation up. In addition, while global supply chain pressures have eased, geopolitical tensions still pose an upside risk to inflation because of their potential to trigger new spikes in the prices of internationally traded goods. 

As noted in previous reports, a severe global slowdown is the key downside risk to inflation. Financial and banking sector vulnerabilities—including high levels of household and corporate debt and balance sheet mismatches in the banking sector—could amplify the impacts of slowing global growth as monetary policy tightens in advanced economies.

The limited tightening in financial conditions due to the recent banking sector stress has been embedded into the base case. However, if global banking stresses intensify further, global credit conditions could tighten significantly. If this risk materializes, a more severe global slowdown and sharply lower commodity prices could follow. The Canadian economy would be affected through tighter financial and credit conditions, weaker foreign demand, lower terms of trade, and declines in business and consumer confidence. Rising unemployment could also interact with high household debt and housing vulnerabilities, amplifying the economic downturn in Canada.
	