
After a period of synchronous slowing, the global economy is showing signs of stabilizing. Global growth is projected to strengthen gradually, largely as expected in the October Report. Survey data suggest that manufacturing activity is starting to pick up in many regions. Service sector indicators have softened recently but remain healthy. Unemployment rates continue to be near historic lows in many advanced economies.

Recent trade developments have been positive. The Phase One trade agreement between the United States and China cancelled previously scheduled tariff increases and reduced some other existing tariffs. As well, ratification of the Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (CUSMA) is pending. Nonetheless, disruptions to supply chains from past trade actions, elevated uncertainty and ongoing geopolitical tensions continue to weigh on global economic activity.

Global growth is expected to increase modestly to around 3 1/4 percent by 2021, with some divergence across regions. Growth in the United States and China is projected to continue to slow, while growth in other major emerging-market economies (EMEs) should pick up. Although the US economy is anticipated to slow, business investment and industrial production—important sources of demand for Canadian exports—are expected to 
strengthen later in the projection horizon. Overall, accommodative monetary policy and favourable financial conditions will continue to support global economic activity.

After slowing sharply in the second half of 2018 and the first half of 2019, growth of global trade and business investment seems to be bottoming out. Notably, global sales of motor vehicles and semiconductors have steadied after contracting abruptly in late 2018. Moreover, new orders of manufactured goods have begun to increase.

Global trade and investment are expected to strengthen over the projection horizon, although only modestly. This is because past increases in tariffs and ongoing uncertainty will continue to take a toll on activity. This drag on global growth is expected to gradually dissipate. However, the total impact of these trade tensions leaves the level of global gross domestic product (GDP) 1.2 percent lower by the end of 2021.2 The impact of trade tensions is marginally smaller than what had been incorporated in the October projection, reflecting the recent Phase One trade agreement between the United States and China.

Market sentiment has improved in recent months, reflecting the perception that risks related to trade tensions and global growth have diminished. Equity prices have continued to strengthen to record highs, and credit spreads have narrowed. The US dollar has edged lower as safe-haven flows have abated. Following a period of widespread central bank easing, expectations of additional policy stimulus by major central banks have moderated. Overall, investors continue to search for yield in a global environment of low interest rates, and the appetite for high-quality assets remains robust. In this context, yields of government bonds globally have increased only modestly and yield curves have steepened. The Canadian dollar has generally traded in a narrow range against the US dollar.

The recent escalation of geopolitical tensions in the Middle East has injected some additional uncertainty into financial markets and temporarily pushed up the price of some assets, such as gold and oil.

Overall, financial market indicators are consistent with the view that global growth has bottomed out and global economic activity should gradually improve.

The US economy continued to grow faster than potential in 2019, although it slowed from the strong pace in 2018. The slowing was broad-based, reflecting in part the combination of waning stimulus from the 2018 tax cuts and a growing drag from trade tensions. Business investment, trade and industrial production were affected by the trade conflict with China and lower production at Boeing. Investment in construction and oil structures also contracted. As well, the manufacturing sector was held back by weak production of motor vehicles. Growth of consumer spending and activity in the service sector also slowed. However, they remained solid, supported by the strong labour market. Spending on consumer durable goods and activity in the housing market have picked up in recent months, partly in response to lower borrowing costs.

US growth is expected to slow toward potential over the next two years as the fiscal stance of the United States shifts from expansionary to broadly neutral. Nonetheless, growth of US business investment is projected to pick up in response to the recent improvement in financial conditions. Along with easier financial conditions, the economic outlook is marginally stronger than in October, reflecting the effects of the Phase One trade agreement with China.

Core inflation remains below target largely due to several temporary factors affecting prices of financial services and clothing. As the effects of these factors dissipate, core inflation is expected to gradually return to target over the projection horizon.

Economic activity has remained subdued in the euro area. Headwinds associated with Brexit, trade policy uncertainty and regulatory changes affecting the auto sector continue to weigh on firms. However, recent survey data indicate that business sentiment has stopped deteriorating and that the manufacturing sector is stabilizing. The labour market remains solid. Growth is expected to continue hovering around 1 percent in early 2020. It should then pick up modestly as foreign demand improves and the monetary measures implemented in 2019 by the European Central Bank support the economy. Core inflation has risen somewhat in recent months but remains well below target.

While the outlook for growth in Japan remains modest, it has been revised up materially since October, driven by the announcement of new fiscal measures.
 
Growth in China continues to moderate, largely as anticipated in the October Report. Over much of 2019, growth was constrained by trade tensions, regulatory efforts to contain financial system vulnerabilities and high food prices. Nonetheless, financial vulnerabilities remain elevated amid high debt and concerns over risk exposure. Growth is projected to moderate from about 6 percent in 2019 to about 5 3/4 percent in 2021, given the expected easing of potential growth and ongoing efforts to stabilize leverage. Economic growth should nevertheless be supported by reduced drag from trade tensions.

Growth in other oil-importing EMEs slowed in 2019, partly as a result of ­geopolitical and trade tensions. Financial conditions also weighed on activity in several EMEs, notably India. Growth is projected to pick up as policy provides support and financial conditions improve. Nonetheless, the outlook is marked down from the October Report, reflecting a larger drag from financial stress in India.

In oil-exporting economies, oil production cuts by member countries of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some other oil producers hampered economic growth over 2019. New cuts were announced by these countries in December. Growth for these countries is nevertheless expected to gradually increase, supported in part by recent policy easing.

The recent average prices of Brent and West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil are US$65 and US$60 per barrel, respectively—each US$5 higher than assumed in the October Report (Box 1, page 10). While the recent improvement in market sentiment contributed to the increase, heightened geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and further oil production cuts announced by OPEC members also played a role. Despite these cuts, global oil output is expected to increase in 2020, supported by solid, albeit slowing, production growth in the United States.
 
The main risks to the Bank’s assumption for oil prices relate to geopolitical tensions and global supply. Prices could increase further if tensions between the United States and Iran escalate. In contrast, stronger production by non-OPEC countries, including the United States, would put downward pressure on prices.

The spread between the prices of WTI and Western Canadian Select has widened since the October Report, recently averaging about US$20. This widening reflects an unexpected increase in oil inventories following the Keystone oil spill and the Canadian National Railway strike, both of which disrupted oil transportation. Looking ahead, oil production should increase along with improved transportation capacity.

Prices of some base metals have risen modestly since the October Report, consistent with improved sentiment about global growth prospects. Prices of lumber and agricultural products have changed little since October.
	
The Canadian economy has been operating relatively close to potential, with a healthy labour market and inflation near 2 percent. However, economic activity in Canada slowed in the last quarter of 2019, and recent data suggest that some of this loss of momentum will spill over into early 2020. The pace of activity is expected to pick up through the first half of 2020 and then remain just above the rate of potential thereafter.

The recent slowdown reflects global and domestic factors. Global trade conflicts and related uncertainty have been weighing on business investment and exports. Some temporary factors have also been holding back exports. In response to weaker demand, manufacturers have reduced production to lessen the buildup of their inventories. In this environment, growth of employment and household spending softened.

Over the projection horizon, business investment and exports are anticipated to improve as oil transportation capacity expands and the impact of trade policy headwinds on global growth diminishes. Household spending is projected to strengthen, driven by solid growth of both the population and household disposable income.

Growth is expected to be 1.6 percent in 2019 and 2020. The pace of activity is anticipated to strengthen to 2.0 percent in 2021.

Compared with the October Report, the estimate for growth in 2019 has been revised up, mainly because of historical data revisions to both business and government investment. The outlook for growth has been revised down in 2020 and up in 2021. The markdown for 2020 reflects weaker growth in the fourth quarter of 2019 and the first quarter of 2020 than previously forecast. Beyond the near term, higher estimates for the working-age 
population and reductions in federal income tax support growth through the projection horizon. Overall, the level of GDP is anticipated to be higher by the end of 2021 than projected in October.

The Bank’s core measures of inflation are around 2 percent, although with some increase in dispersion. The core measures are consistent with an economy that has been operating close to potential. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation is expected to remain close to the 2 percent target over the projection horizon.
	
The Bank estimates that growth in the fourth quarter slowed to 0.3 percent. Growth is forecast to rebound in the first quarter of 2020 but remain moderate at 1.3 percent. This outlook is about three-quarters of a percentage point lower on average than in the October projection. Weakness in global economic activity is contributing to a larger adjustment of inventories than previously anticipated. Consumption and housing are also weaker than forecast. As well, special factors, including labour disputes, production disruptions and adverse weather, are affecting near-term growth dynamics.

Challenges in the oil and gas sector and the difficult global environment continue to weigh on business investment and exports. There are early indications that the level of investment in the oil and gas sector is stabilizing. Outside the oil and gas sector, business investment is estimated to be growing modestly amid ongoing global uncertainty. In particular, spending on machinery and equipment is likely to remain soft in the near term. Exports continued to contract in the fourth quarter of 2019, reflecting weak global demand and the end of motor vehicle production at the General 
Motors plant in Oshawa. In addition, exports were affected by temporary factors, including the Keystone pipeline outage and the Canadian National Railway strike. Exports are expected to expand in the first quarter of 2020 as the impact of these factors fades.

Household spending softened in late 2019. The effects of global trade conflicts and elevated uncertainty may have spread beyond investment and exports, contributing to the slowdown in the labour market and weighing on confidence. This may have contributed to more cautious behaviour by households. Weakness in the manufacturing sector and fiscal tightening in some provinces have also likely dampened sentiment. Consumption growth 
is expected to pick up in the first quarter of 2020, in keeping with a healthy labour market and firm income growth.

The level of housing activity remains solid across most of Canada, although recent indicators suggest that residential investment growth has slowed from its previously strong pace. Demand remains robust in Quebec, where the labour market has been strong. In Ontario and British Columbia, population growth is boosting housing demand. In contrast, Alberta’s housing market continues to adjust to challenges in the oil and gas sector. Nationally, house prices have continued to increase and should strengthen slightly in the near term, consistent with the responses to the Bank’s recent Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations.

The Bank estimates that the output gap was between -1.25 and -0.25 percent in the fourth quarter of 2019. This range implies more spare ­capacity than in the third quarter, reflecting slower growth in the fourth quarter.

Excess capacity remains concentrated primarily in energy-producing regions. Elsewhere, indicators of capacity pressures and labour shortages have suggested little slack. In the winter Business Outlook Survey, firms outside the Prairies reported that labour-related capacity pressures have continued to increase.

Overall, the labour market continues to be healthy. Job gains were strong through 2019. These new jobs were concentrated in the service sector and were largely full-time. Job vacancies remain elevated, and the unemployment rate is close to a historically low level. In recent months, however, job growth has slowed, mainly in manufacturing and public administration. The average number of hours worked has decreased somewhat in the manufacturing sector, consistent with softer demand conditions, but has fallen by more in the service sector and in regions with little slack. This could in part be because tight conditions are drawing into the labour market more young and older workers, who typically work fewer hours.5 In contrast, labour market conditions are soft in the Prairies and job growth is slower than in other regions.

Wage growth has been firm through 2019, with a broad-based pickup across regions. The Bank’s composite measure of wage growth, the wage-common, is estimated to have remained at 2.8 percent in the fourth quarter, nearly a percentage point higher than in the first quarter of 2019.

The Bank estimates that CPI inflation was close to the 2 percent target in the fourth quarter. In November, CPI inflation increased to 2.2 percent from 1.9 percent in previous months and likely remained slightly above target in December, driven largely by higher gasoline prices. Core inflation measures have been around 2 percent, although the dispersion of these measures has increased. Measures of core inflation are consistent with an economy that has been operating close to capacity.

The Bank anticipates that economic activity will improve through 2020 and grow just above the rate of potential in 2021. Household spending is expected to strengthen and grow at a moderate pace. The contribution to growth from business investment and exports should also increase as foreign demand improves, the impact from trade policy uncertainty diminishes and oil transportation capacity expands. In this context, activity in the goods sector should strengthen, and the pace of ­inventory investment is projected to improve. Meanwhile, growth of government spending is expected to slow, consistent with fiscal measures announced in provincial budgets.
 
Household spending growth over 2020 and 2021 should be supported by a rising working-age population, solid labour income growth and reductions in federal income tax.

Consumption growth is expected to strengthen in 2020, following a period of softness. However, there is considerable uncertainty surrounding the degree of persistence of the recent softness. In the context of elevated indebtedness, households are expected to remain somewhat more cautious in their consumption decisions, and the savings rate is anticipated to rise modestly. However, a healthy labour market and rising wealth should lift household demand over the projection horizon. Considering these factors, in the Bank’s base-case projection, consumer spending gradually strengthens and then grows at a pace in line with disposable income.

Housing activity is projected to continue its recovery in 2020, then evolve roughly in line with the underlying fundamentals. With resales having rebounded in 2019, new construction is expected to be the main driver of growth in residential investment over the projection horizon. The share of multiples in housing starts should continue to trend upward, due to their relative affordability and to growing demand in urban areas.

Growth of both business investment and exports is expected to increase over the projection horizon. This is in line with a steady rise in the growth of foreign demand after a period of weakness. As well, the Phase One trade agreement between the United States and China and the pending ratification of CUSMA should be positive for growth. While trade policy uncertainty will continue to restrain the level of business investment and exports, its effect on growth should diminish gradually over the next two years.

Business investment outside the oil and gas sector is expected to grow at a moderate pace in 2020 and 2021. This outlook is consistent with the responses to the winter Business Outlook Survey. Business sentiment remained healthy, particularly outside oil-producing regions. Investment intentions are positive in the service sector, notably for spending on new technology. Overall, the strength of the service sector and the digitalization of the economy will continue to support business investment. In addition, large infrastructure projects, such as LNG Canada and Trans Mountain, will boost capital spending in the transportation sector.

Non-energy exports are expected to expand over the projection horizon, supported by firming foreign demand. However, motor vehicle exports are a notable exception. They are forecast to decline as production mandates for Canadian motor vehicle assemblers are reduced and US sales growth slows.

In the oil and gas sector, improving transportation capacity and the easing of production constraints are expected to support stronger production. As a result, growth of energy exports should pick up in 2020 and 2021. As business sentiment improves with the expansion of transportation capacity, investment in the sector should expand in 2021.

The Bank forecasts CPI inflation will be around the 2 percent inflation target over the projection horizon, with small fluctuations in 2020 resulting from volatility in energy prices. The boost from the federal carbon pollution charge is expected to roughly offset modest downward pressures from economic slack.

The projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. Almost all firms responding to the Business Outlook Survey anticipate that inflation will remain within the Bank’s target range of 1 to 3 percent over the next two years. Most respondents to the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations anticipate inflation will be within that range or just above it over the next two years.10 The December 2019 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.0 percent in 2019 and 1.9 percent in 2020. Responses to a quarterly question on long-term inflation expectations show an average of 2.0 percent through 2029.

The base-case projection provides the Bank’s view of the most likely outcome for inflation, although any projection is subject to considerable uncertainty. Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the projection for CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. A complementary perspective using statistical analysis of the Bank’s forecast errors suggests that a 50 percent confidence interval around the base-case projection widens from ±0.2 percentage points in the first quarter of 2020 to ±0.6 percentage points by the end of 2021. Over the same period, a 90 percent confidence band widens from ±0.6 to ±1.4 percentage points.

The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks. In recent reports, the Bank identified trade policy tensions and the associated uncertainty as the most important risk to the Canadian economy. The pending ratification of CUSMA and the Phase One trade agreement between the United States and China have been positive developments. In this context, the Bank judges that a more extreme downside scenario related to trade tensions has become less likely over the projection horizon. Nonetheless, the risks associated with trade policies remain important, as discussed below.

However, geopolitical tensions centred in the Middle East have recently intensified, with tragic consequences. Further sharp escalation of tensions could have significant negative macroeconomic impacts on the global economy. The Bank’s base-case projection assumes that this risk will not materialize.

Aside from geopolitical risk, the Bank assesses that risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. As in past reports, the Bank presents a selection of risks identified as most important to the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks considered in the base-case projection. Table 4 summarizes the evolution of some of the key risks since October. Historical data revisions show that the savings rate has been higher in recent years than previously estimated. This has helped balance the risk of stronger consumption in Canada that was identified in October. As a result, this risk is no longer listed below.

This risk relates to trade policy tensions between the United States and its trading partners. Because the Bank’s base-case projection incorporates the adverse effects of announced tariffs and elevated trade policy uncertainty, the trade policy risk is two-sided.

If current trade tensions were resolved and increases in tariffs introduced over the past two years reversed, economic activity and inflation in Canada would be stronger. Alternatively, trade conflicts could escalate again or become more widespread, which would negatively affect global and Canadian GDP. The net effect of increased trade 
tensions on Canadian inflation would depend on several factors. While weaker aggregate demand would reduce inflationary pressures, a weaker Canadian dollar and lower productivity would push inflation up.

The rebound in housing could be stronger than anticipated in the base-case projection. Stronger housing demand could put additional pressure on already-elevated house prices in some regions, increase borrowing and exacerbate household vulnerabilities. This would particularly be the case if growth in housing outpaces fundamentals, especially if speculative activity re-emerges.

Recent movements in equity prices and risk premiums generally embody optimistic views about corporate earnings and economic growth. Financial conditions could tighten suddenly if growth in major economies were to fall short of market expectations or tail risks were to re-emerge. Similarly, an upward shift in inflation expectations could raise global interest rates, leading to higher debt-service burdens and reduced activity in sectors sensitive to the interest rate. In both cases, global and Canadian growth would weaken.

China’s efforts to stimulate its economy to offset trade tensions or other headwinds, while constraining credit growth, could be challenging. As well, credit growth could fall by more than expected as authorities allow an increase in defaults of private sector bonds. In other oil-importing EMEs, the recovery could be more sluggish than 
expected in the base-case projection. In particular, the financial stress in India and ongoing political challenges in some EMEs could have larger and more persistent effects. Such developments could put downward pressure on global growth and commodity prices.

Potential output could be higher than currently embedded in the Bank’s base-case projection. This could be due to digitalization or a lower natural rate of unemployment. Stronger growth in the structural drivers of the US economy would result in higher US household spending and private investment. This would boost demand for Canadian exports and exert upward pressure on Canadian inflation.
