Rising vaccination rates and easing health restrictions are supporting the economic recovery in Canada and other major economies. However, the Delta variant of COVID-19 has caused case numbers in some countries to rise. Emerging-market and developing economies with lower vaccination rates and less fiscal and monetary policy support are particularly affected.

Economic activity and inflation have picked up in the second half of 2021 in Canada and globally. As a result, central banks in several advanced economies have reduced the extent of their monetary stimulus or signalled their intention to do so.

Supply disruptions and energy constraints are weighing on growth and pushing up prices in many economies, including Canada’s. Employment has increased, but labour market recoveries remain incomplete.

Global economic activity continues to improve, but progress remains choppy and uneven. The recovery has a firmer foundation in advanced economies than in emerging-market economies (EMEs) because of higher vaccination rates and more stimulative policy measures. Labour market improvements continue to be uneven and incomplete in many countries. 

Activity in the United States has been recovering solidly, although the Delta variant has slowed progress in recent months. China’s economy is facing headwinds that are restraining growth. In other EMEs and the euro area, growth is resuming as restrictions related to COVID-19 are eased further. 

Major energy disruptions in various parts of the world are affecting economic activity and pushing up costs and inflation. Transportation bottlenecks and supply shortages of many goods are also limiting growth and putting upward pressure on the prices of some goods, especially in North America. These pressures on inflation are expected to persist until the second half of 2022. 

Overall, the Bank projects growth of global gross domestic product (GDP) to rise to 6.5 percent in 2021—a very strong pace but slower than projected in the July Report. Global growth is expected to moderate in 2022 and 2023 as the recovery moves beyond the rebound phase and the effects of policy stimulus fade.

Financial conditions continue to support economic activity. In advanced economies, corporate bond spreads are still narrow and equity price indexes are generally near their historical highs. Although they remain low, yields on 10-year government bonds are higher than noted in the July Report. This is partly due to elevated inflation expectations reported in market-based indicators and private sector forecasts. In response to improved economic conditions and rising inflation, several central banks in advanced economies are reducing or signalling their intentions to reduce the pace of their asset purchases. Some central banks, especially in EMEs, have also raised their policy rate. 

US GDP grew at a strong pace in the first half of the year and has surpassed its pre-pandemic output level. The recovery of the labour market, however, is progressing more slowly. While the rate of job openings is near a record high, the employment rate remains below its pre-pandemic level for most categories of workers. Aggregate measures of wage growth have recently increased, with the pickup concentrated in certain industries—including leisure and hospitality—that have reopened rapidly. 

GDP growth is expected to slow in the second half of 2021, reflecting a moderation in consumption growth. This is partly because the positive impacts of past government transfers are fading and the temporary resurgence of COVID-19 cases over the summer has dampened growth in hard-to-distance services. Transportation bottlenecks and shortages of semiconductors and construction materials continue to limit production in some sectors that are important for Canadian exports, such as motor vehicles and parts and construction. These supply chain disruptions are now projected to last until the second half of 2022, after which production in these sectors should improve. 

In 2022 and 2023, solid consumption growth is expected to support GDP as households begin to spend some of the savings they accumulated during the pandemic. The projection also assumes an additional US$1.5 trillion of government spending on infrastructure and research and development spread over eight years starting in 2022. 

Overall, US GDP is expected to grow by 5.6 percent in 2021, a slower pace than projected in the July Report. Growth is anticipated to moderate in 2022 and 2023 as the economic rebound from the pandemic ends and spending from fiscal stimulus packages wanes. 

US personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation is expected to rise to close to 5 percent in the second half of 2021. It will likely peak in the fourth quarter and then gradually decrease as the temporary effects of supply shortages dissipate and energy prices stabilize. However, PCE inflation is expected to remain above 2 percent over the projection horizon. 

Euro area GDP is expected to continue its strong rebound in the second half of 2021. High vaccination rates have allowed for an easing of health restrictions, which supports spending on hard-to-distance services. Policy measures also continue to bolster domestic demand. Growth is projected to moderate in 2022 and 2023 as the initial effects of the reopening and fiscal stimulus fade. 

China’s GDP is expected to grow by about 8 percent in 2021 due to solid momentum from late 2020. However, growth has been slowing recently and is expected to average just above 2 percent in the second half of 2021. Efforts to contain the pandemic, as well as energy shortages and past fiscal and monetary policy tightening, have restrained this growth. In addition, property sector regulations implemented starting in 2020 are causing housing activity to decrease. As a result, some property developers are experiencing financial distress. Other regulatory changes in a wide range of sectors, including technology and education, are also expected to weigh on business investment. Growth is projected to slow to below 6 percent in 2022 and 2023. Uncertainty about the property sector and the impact of recent regulatory changes is high and could result in weaker-than-expected growth over the projection horizon.
	
After contracting sharply in the second quarter, economic activity in other oil-importing EMEs is expected to bounce back in the second half of the year. This is supported by the decline in daily COVID-19 cases and the easing of some health restrictions. However, GDP growth in 2022 and 2023 is projected to slow relative to 2021 as the initial rebound phase passes. Slow vaccine rollouts and the lack of policy support are expected to continue to curtail growth in many EMEs. 

In the rest-of-the-world group, economic activity continues to strengthen. Increases in oil production and prices have been boosting growth in this group’s oil-exporting economies. Robust vaccination rollouts in advanced economies and the associated easing of restrictions are also supporting activity. 

Production of oil and natural gas has struggled to keep up with strengthening demand. At the same time, temporary supply outages and low inventory levels for oil and natural gas have driven energy prices up since the July Report. US oil and gas producers remain cautious about increasing production. As well, members of the Organization of the 
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some non-OPEC (OPEC+) oil producers continue to increase output only moderately despite high prices.

The prices of Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canadian Select oil have risen and in the projection are assumed to be US$80, US$75 and US$65, respectively, each US$5 higher than in the July Report. In the near term, temporary supply outages, rapid growth in demand and low global stocks could continue to support prices above these assumed levels. In the medium term, the likelihood of further increases of OPEC+ production in 2022 and an expansion of US output could pull oil prices down. Prices of natural gas are expected to remain high through the winter before easing in 2022 as peak seasonal demand passes and production picks up.

Prices have fluctuated significantly since the July Report for several components in the Bank’s non-energy commodity price index. Sharp increases in global energy prices and regulatory actions in China to reduce carbon emissions have led to lower production and higher prices for aluminum and a number of other base metals. These changes have also resulted in decreased steel production and consequently a drop in prices of iron ore. Prices of forestry products have increased since the July Report. Markets expect non-energy commodity prices to remain elevated over the projection horizon due to a mix of strong global demand and limited supply.
	
The Canadian economy is once again growing robustly, enabled by a high vaccination rate and the associated easing of containment measures. While the Delta variant is requiring continued public health precautions and weighing on consumer confidence, domestic demand has continued to recover. In particular, spending on hard-to-distance services has rebounded solidly. High vaccination rates have also reduced the risk to the economy of further widespread closures.

The labour market is recovering with a rebound in employment in hard-to-distance sectors. Despite an unemployment rate that remains above its pre‑pandemic level, some firms are facing challenges finding workers.

Strong demand, globally and in Canada, has run up against persistent supply constraints that are limiting production and increasing costs. As a result, prices of some goods, particularly those impacted by global supply disruptions, are rising quickly. Bottlenecks and shortages are leading to production slowdowns, delayed or cancelled purchases, and lower investment. Energy supply disruptions in other countries are negatively affecting their manufacturing sectors, which in turn could exacerbate production slowdowns in Canada. 

Annual growth in economic activity is forecast to be around 5 percent in 2021. Growth is projected to be about 4¼ percent in 2022 and 3 ¾ percent in 2023. Continued progress on managing COVID‑19—both domestically and globally—should reduce uncertainty and cautiousness. In turn, this will boost consumption, exports and business investment. While the economy is likely to continue to require fiscal and monetary support, the recovery is becoming broader and more self-sustaining.

Overall, the outlook is for robust growth into 2022, but the pace has been revised down since the July Report because of more severe supply disruptions and weaker foreign demand. Estimates of the adverse impacts of supply disruptions in 2021 and into 2022 have been revised up. Because supply is revised down by more than GDP, the output gap is narrower at the start of the projection than previously expected.

Significant uncertainty surrounds the outlook for GDP and potential output. In particular, the impacts of supply disruptions, labour market mismatches and accelerated digital investments remain difficult to quantify. 

Consumer price index (CPI) inflation is expected to remain elevated for the rest of 2021 and into 2022 due to ongoing supply disruptions created by the pandemic and higher energy prices. Inflation is expected to ease to about 2 percent by the end of 2022 as these pressures dissipate. Inflation is then anticipated to rise modestly in 2023—as the economy moves into excess demand—before returning gradually toward target in 2024.
	
The economy is expected to grow by about 4¾ percent in the second half of 2021, much stronger than the average pace of around 2¼ percent in the first half of the year. Consumption is leading the recovery, with a rebound in spending on in-person services combining with the already-elevated level of goods purchases. Spending on air transportation and food and accommodation has strengthened considerably in recent months. However, supply constraints and lingering cautiousness over the virus have 
been limiting spending and production.

Housing resales and construction activity remain elevated but have declined from historically high levels (Chart 6). This is occurring amid signs that the pandemic-related boost in demand for more living space is easing. While multiple-unit housing starts have remained relatively robust, single-family starts have seen a more significant decline since the first quarter. Nonetheless, housing markets remain tight, and high disposable incomes and low borrowing rates should continue to support solid levels of housing activity.

Exports and business investment are expected to rebound through the second half of 2021, with foreign demand and business confidence strengthening. Shipping bottlenecks and shortages of key inputs are, however, pushing up costs and slowing production in the near term. In particular, the global shortage of semiconductors continues to weigh on motor vehicle production and exports.

Job gains have been robust in recent months as in-person services have resumed, benefiting many of the workers who suffered earlier in the pandemic. However, unemployment remains elevated, and many of those who are employed are not working as many hours as they were before the pandemic.

The abrupt closure and subsequent rapid reopening of the economy in each wave of the pandemic have worsened the usual search frictions in the labour market. It takes time for workers to find the right job and for employers to find workers with the right skills and experience. As a result of these frictions in the matching process, the labour market is showing signs of both continued slack and acute shortages in some sectors.

The results of the Bank’s Business Outlook Survey for the third quarter of 2021 suggest that labour shortages have intensified. These shortages fall into two areas.

The first is the re-emergence of shortages that existed before the pandemic, such as for skilled trades and digital-oriented jobs. These shortages are consistent with pre-pandemic challenges and could become more severe as the recovery unfolds.

The second relates to businesses that are seeing a large increase in demand, including restaurants and retail establishments. Some of these shortages should be largely temporary, although it may take time to work through these shortages in certain sectors of the economy. Many Canadians are still unemployed, and employers can recruit and train workers only so quickly. In addition, some workers may be hesitant to return to customer-
facing jobs due to lingering fears of the virus.

Moreover, some who had worked in industries that are rehiring in large numbers, such as restaurants, have moved on to other sectors or are pursuing further education or training. About one-half of unemployed workers who responded to the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations for the third quarter of 2021 reported that they were looking to move to a different industry. As a result, there is a risk that some of these labour shortages could persist.

Wage growth has risen with the rebound in employment but remains moderate. Wage gains by industry and occupation are generally at or below the average growth rates observed before the pandemic.1 However, as labour markets continue to recover and competition for workers picks up, there could be increasing pressure to attract and retain staff through improved working arrangements, benefits and wages.

For the economy as a whole, activity is below potential output. The Bank typically estimates excess supply for the entire economy. But the assessment continues to be more complicated than usual. As a result of pandemic-related disruptions, the degree of excess supply and demand varies materially across sectors, rendering an aggregate measure of slack less meaningful.

Instead, more sector-specific analysis is needed. For instance, activity in hard-to-distance service sectors such as travel and accommodation remains below its pre-pandemic levels largely because of weak demand. As such, these sectors face considerable slack.

In contrast, as consumers have shifted toward goods and housing, expenditures in these sectors have risen far above pre-pandemic levels. For example, spending on household appliances and furniture in the second quarter was about 20 percent higher than it was at the end of 2019.

This surge in demand for goods and housing is taking place amid global supply disruptions, creating excess demand for some goods. These supply disruptions include shortages of key intermediate inputs, such as semiconductors. The supply disruptions also include transportation challenges, such as container shortages and bottlenecks at key ports, which are raising shipping costs and delaying deliveries for many goods. In some cases, the supply constraints are so severe that production is actually falling despite higher prices. This is the case for new motor vehicles. These demand and supply factors indicate excess demand clearly remains in these sectors.

Supply has been revised down over the near term because of pandemic-related disruptions. These negative short-run supply-side effects are expected to peak in the fourth quarter and to gradually dissipate over 2022. Taking these respective demand and supply pressures into account, the Bank estimates that the output gap was between -2.25 and -1.25 percent in the third quarter. Uncertainty around this range remains particularly elevated given the exceptional mix of pandemic-related supply and demand factors.

CPI inflation was about 4½ percent in September and is expected to rise and average around 4¾ percent over the remainder of 2021. Three key factors are generating the current strength in prices. First, supply constraints are pushing up the prices of goods. Second, prices that had fallen last year are continuing to recover with the rebound in demand for hard-to-distance services. Third, in addition to these pandemic-related factors, higher energy prices are expected to contribute about 1⅔ percentage points to total inflation in the fourth quarter of 2021.
	
Growth is expected to be supported by both domestic and foreign demand and to become broader and more sustainable over time. The contribution of exports and business investment is forecast to increase over the projection. Economic growth is projected to moderate from around 5 percent in 2021 to around 4¼ percent in 2022 and 3¾ percent in 2023, as the rebound from the reopening of the economy and fiscal stimulus fades. 

Global disruptions are expected to reduce supply in Canada in 2021 and 2022 and to dampen economic activity and demand, with the peak impact occurring at the end of 2021. Based on these projections for aggregate demand and supply, the Bank forecasts the output gap to close sometime in the middle quarters of 2022. However, because the magnitude and persistence of the impacts of these supply constraints are uncertain, the timing of the absorption of slack is imprecise.

Consumption growth is expected to be strong, supported by solid confidence, high levels of disposable income and some spending of accumulated savings. With continued gains in employment and hours worked, growth in labour income should pick up even as government transfers gradually decline.

As the pandemic recedes and confidence rises, spending on hard-to-distance services is expected to continue to strengthen, while growth in demand for goods is projected to moderate. Nonetheless, a degree of cautiousness is anticipated to persist. Some consumers may be slower to resume normal activities even as the threat of infection gradually diminishes. Lingering economic concerns could also prompt some households, especially those with lower incomes, to hold onto more of their savings.

Housing market activity is anticipated to remain elevated over 2022 and 2023 after having moderated from recent record-high levels. Increased immigration, solid income levels and favourable financing conditions will support ongoing strength. New construction will add to the supply of houses and should help soften house price growth.

Robust foreign demand and elevated commodity prices are expected to support strong export growth (Chart 12). Supply chain issues will likely continue to weigh on activity but should be largely resolved by the end of 2022. The drought in Western Canada in summer 2021 is also expected to reduce agricultural exports over the next several quarters. The easing of these supply disruptions is anticipated to contribute to a continued strong recovery in exports later in 2022 and 2023.

Services exports are projected to rebound as international travel approaches pre-pandemic levels. However, a full recovery will take time because new ways of working and climate initiatives could weigh on areas such as business travel.

The relatively high oil and natural gas prices will support energy exports over the projection horizon. Existing and planned oil transport capacity, including the recent expansion of Enbridge Line 3 as well as the forthcoming Trans Mountain Expansion Project, should meet anticipated export growth for several years.

Once the supply chain issues and shipping bottlenecks constraining trade have dissipated, imports are projected to grow in line with strong domestic demand and the expected rebuilding of inventories.

Investment outside the oil and natural gas sector is anticipated to rise as supply disruptions ease, demand increases and business confidence improves. The Business Outlook Survey for the third quarter of 2021 revealed broad-based strength in investment intentions. The accelerating adoption of digitalization and information technologies should continue to boost hiring and investment. Although remote work and online shopping are reducing demand for office and retail space, the trend toward e-commerce should increase investment in logistics and warehouses.

Investment in the oil and natural gas sector is forecast to increase but remain below pre-pandemic levels. Despite higher prices, investment is expected to remain subdued given elevated uncertainty about both future prices and long-term demand.

Inventory investment is expected to contribute to growth over the projection horizon as retailers rebuild inventories after unprecedented drawdowns in 2020 and ongoing delivery delays.

Pandemic-related forces are having a complicated impact on the inflation outlook. Supply constraints will push up the level of prices, but the effect on the rate of inflation is expected to diminish in 2022 (Chart 14).2 This is because the upward pressure on prices will moderate, and inflation rates will come down as disruptions to supply gradually fade.

At the same time, the surge in demand for hard-to-distance services is also anticipated to moderate, putting less pressure on prices of services. Some CPI components, such as airfare, have already regained or surpassed their pre-pandemic levels, and further upward pressures are likely to be limited as additional capacity comes back online. In addition, the impact of higher energy prices is expected to dissipate over 2022. Consequently, CPI inflation is expected to ease from about 4¾ percent at the end of 2021 to around 2 percent at the end of 2022.

Afterward, the degree of excess demand becomes the primary factor influencing the projection for inflation. With the economy anticipated to move into modest excess demand, inflation is expected to be slightly above target in 2023. This is a consequence of Governing Council’s exceptional forward guidance to keep the policy interest rate at the effective lower bound until economic slack is absorbed so that the 2 percent inflation target is sustainably achieved. Inflation is expected to return again toward the target 
in 2024.

Medium- and long-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at the 2 percent target. Both businesses and consumers view price pressures as elevated in the near term. A large majority of respondents to the Business Outlook Survey for the third quarter of 2021 expect inflation to be above 2 percent on average over the next two years. However, a majority of firms view the factors pushing up inflation, including energy and supply issues, as temporary. The Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations for the third quarter of 2021 reported that short-term inflation expectations have also risen, in line with actual inflation. Nonetheless, respondents’ 2- and 5-year-ahead inflation expectations have remained stable.

Private sector forecasters have increased their expectations for inflation two years from now. However, their longer-term expectations have remained stable. The July 2021 Consensus Economics forecast continues to show an average of 2 percent through 2031. In addition, while the 5- and 10-year Canadian break-even inflation rates are now somewhat above pre-pandemic levels, they are well aligned with the 2 percent inflation target.

Based on the progress of the economic recovery, the Bank adjusted its target for purchases through its Government of Canada Bond Purchase Program (GBPP) in July 2021 from $3 billion per week to $2 billion per week. Since then, the Bank’s ownership of total Government of Canada (GoC) bonds outstanding has increased modestly to 46 percent from 44 percent. The composition and size of the Bank’s overall balance sheet, however, has 
been roughly stable (Chart 16).3 Most of the shorter-term assets acquired at the start of the pandemic matured before the July Report. The remaining assets are mainly GoC bonds, which now make up about 85 percent of total holdings. 

In this context, the total stock of GoC bonds held on the Bank’s balance sheet currently sits at around $425 billion. This includes bonds acquired in both the primary market at GoC bond auctions and the secondary market through the GBPP. 
4 While the proportion has varied over time, around 30 percent of the current stock of bonds on the Bank’s balance sheet was purchased in the primary market and around 70 percent in the secondary market.

Looking ahead, a significant amount of bond holdings will mature in the coming years, concentrated in the next one to five years, and these maturities will vary month to month. Given this combination of large and uneven maturities, the Bank’s total holdings of GoC bonds will fluctuate modestly over the next few years.

Uncertainty around the projection remains unusually high. The outlook continues to depend on the evolution of the pandemic, including the spread of COVID‑19 variants. However, in Canada, the likelihood of a severe downturn has diminished with high rates of vaccination. The reopening of the economy will nonetheless continue to be a complex process as pervasive supply constraints unwind. Households are also adjusting their consumption and employment in response to the shifting economic environment. Consequently, the evolution of supply and demand and its effects on inflation are particularly uncertain.

Some of the risks identified in previous reports have been partially incorporated into the projection. The base-case scenario now includes slower housing market activity over the near term and longer-lasting effects on inflation from supply-side disruptions.

The outlook for inflation remains subject to several upside and downside risks. The Bank views the risks to the outlook for inflation to be roughly balanced around its updated projection. However, with inflation above the top of the Bank’s inflation-control range and expected to stay there for some time, the upside risks are of greater concern. While the Bank views elevated inflation as transitory, the realization of additional upside risks or unanticipated persistence of existing pressures could lead to a rise in 
inflation expectations along with more pervasive labour cost and inflationary pressures. The risk is that these effects begin to feed into embedded inflation.

Drawing from a larger set of risks that were considered, this section presents a selection of those identified as most important for the projected path of inflation.

The effects of the pandemic may be more severe and persistent than assumed in the projection. Some evidence shows that the immunity provided by vaccines may be waning more quickly than previously anticipated, increasing the potential for new waves of the pandemic. The spread of the Delta and other possible future variants may prolong 
the ongoing softness in demand for hard-to-distance services. This may dampen the rebound in confidence, resulting in lower spending and lower inflationary pressures. 

The projection continues to include some degree of caution around consumption. However, progress in vaccinations and reduced pandemic-related uncertainty could boost confidence by more than expected. As well, households could spend more of their accumulated savings or accelerate their spending. Consumption and residential investment would then be stronger than projected and would contribute to greater inflationary pressures.

Supply bottlenecks and cost pressures could lead to more persistent inflationary pressures and a slower economic recovery than what is embedded in the base case. At the same time, energy supply shortages in other countries could put further pressure on supply chains as manufacturing production is disrupted. These disruptions to business operations may also lead firms to adjust their supply chains in ways that could increase costs. More persistent labour shortages could also result in higher wage pressures.

The risks around exports remain tilted to the downside. Competitiveness challenges and Buy American provisions could mute the benefits of expected increases in foreign demand. More persistent or severe supply disruptions may further dampen exports. As well, China’s economy could weaken further, notably in response to stress in the property sector and regulatory changes in other key sectors. This would pull down global commodity prices and Canadian exports.

With high levels of global indebtedness, increased inflationary pressures, reduced policy support and elevated equity valuations, a pullback in risk appetite could trigger a sharp tightening of global financial conditions. This would constrain access to credit for vulnerable EMEs or other highly indebted borrowers and dampen global demand.

