Global economic growth slowed around the world in the latter part of 2018. A moderation from above-potential growth was anticipated due to cyclical factors and the impact of trade policies. However, the slowdown was greater than expected in the January Monetary Policy Report. Trade policy conflicts 
and the related uncertainty, as well as temporary country-specific factors, have had larger effects than previously anticipated.

With accumulating evidence of slowing activity, many central banks have signalled a slower pace of monetary policy normalization. China announced additional fiscal and monetary measures. As a result of these changes, along with perceived progress in US–China trade talks, global financial con-
ditions have improved, and commodity prices have increased.

Uncertainty stemming from the US–China trade dispute and other trade tensions is assumed to continue to weigh on sentiment, trade and investment, thereby restraining activity globally. Given all these factors, global growth is expected to pick up in the first half of 2019 as the impacts of temporary 
factors fade. Growth should average about 3 1/4 per cent over the projection horizon, roughly in line with potential.

The recent slowdown of global activity has been broad-based across economies and particularly pronounced for global trade and business investment. Trade policies and related uncertainty have played a central role in this synchronous slowdown. The total drag stemming from new tariffs implemented over the past two years by the United States and other countries and from trade policy uncertainty is now estimated to reduce global gross domestic product (GDP) by 0.4 per cent by the end of 2021, somewhat more than estimated in the January Report.

US imports from China of products subject to tariff increases imposed in 2018 have declined. US exports to China of goods subject to new tariffs recovered somewhat in early 2019 alongside progress in bilateral talks, but they remain significantly lower than before the imposition of the tariffs.

Other regional factors have been weighing on trade. Slowing domestic demand in China has been a drag on imports, particularly since the fourth quarter of 2018. Changes to emissions testing standards for new vehicles introduced in September 2018 temporarily dampened exports in the euro area.

In addition, the weakness in trade is likely exacerbated by lower demand for upgrades of electronic goods: global shipments of cell phones and personal computers both declined in 2018.

The recent dynamics of global trade are amplifying a slowdown that is occurring for structural reasons. For instance, one such reason for declining trade is associated with reshoring or nearshoring in conjunction with a shift toward more technology-intensive production.

The US expansion moderated at the end of 2018, partly reflecting the impact on household spending of past increases in interest rates. Residential investment contracted for the fourth quarter in a row in response to declining affordability. In addition, tariffs and trade tensions have increasingly weighed on exports and imports. Meanwhile, business investment continued to grow at a strong pace, supported by the 2018 tax changes and deregulation. 

Recent indicators continue to suggest healthy US growth in the first quarter of 2019 despite the disruptions caused by the US government shutdown. US activity is still supported by solid employment gains in recent months, rising wage growth and elevated consumer and business confidence. 

After expanding at a robust pace last year, economic growth is forecast to slow to around 2¼ per cent in 2019 and further to about 1 3/4 per cent in 2020 and 2021. The slowdown in growth is largely in response to past increases in interest rates and the waning effects of fiscal stimulus. Core inflation is expected to remain close to 2 per cent. 

In the euro area, the recent experience of weaker-than-expected growth continued into the fourth quarter of 2018. The manufacturing sector experienced a broad-based contraction, and the Purchasing Managers’ Index indicates ongoing weakness into the first quarter of 2019. Consumer confidence also deteriorated. This suggests that the headwinds associated with Brexit, global trade uncertainties and domestic factors, such as fiscal challenges in Italy and protests in France, have been more important than previously assessed.
 
Some of these headwinds are anticipated to continue to dampen economic activity over the projection horizon. Growth is nevertheless expected to improve in the first half of 2019 as the impacts of some temporary factors recede, including the effects of last September’s changes to emissions testing standards for new vehicles.

Core inflation is still tepid and is anticipated to increase only gradually.

With ongoing trade tensions and past deleveraging, the Chinese economy has continued its gradual slowing. In response to softer momentum, authorities have enacted modest fiscal and monetary stimulus policies in recent months. These measures have helped to improve consumer confidence and industrial production since the beginning of the year. Nonetheless, growth is expected to moderate from about 6 
1/2 per cent in 2018 to just below 6 per cent by the end of the projection period. Chinese authorities have signalled that they would provide additional policy support should it be needed. High corporate debt levels and trade tensions could continue to be challenges to growth.

Economic activity was weak in other oil-importing emerging-market economies (EMEs) in the second half of 2018. This weakness reflected slower growth in India, Brazil and Mexico, as well as recessions in Turkey and Argentina. While the recessions in these two countries should persist over the first half of this year, overall growth in oil-importing EMEs is expected to pick up, supported by rebounds in India and Brazil. Cuts to oil production by some members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) are expected to be a drag on these economies over the first six months of 2019.

In response to slowing economic growth, many central banks have signalled a slower pace of monetary policy normalization. Consistent with the moderation of the global economy and central bank communications, nominal yields on government bonds have decreased. At the same time, credit spreads have narrowed and equity prices have increased.

In Canada and the United States, yields on 10-year government bonds have been fluctuating around the yields on three-month treasury bills. The recent episode of a negative spread between these two yields (yield-curve inversion) was modest and short-lived and accompanied by improvements in other financial indicators. In the past, yield-curve inversions have often occurred before recessions, especially in the US economy. However, these inversions were typically the result of short-term interest rates rising persistently above long-term rates rather than because long-term rates were falling, as has been observed over the past couple of months. In recent years, structural factors, such as increased public and private sector demand for high-quality government securities, have contributed to lower long-term yields. In this context, inversions should be expected to occur more frequently and, unless large and persistent, should be regarded as less informative about future growth than they have been in the past.

The prices of Brent and West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil have increased since January. Oil prices rose in response to improved market sentiment, a greater-than-expected output cut in Saudi Arabia and risks of falling production in Iran, Venezuela and Libya. In its projection, the Bank assumes that the prices of Brent and WTI oil will remain close to their recent average levels.

Uncertainty around the future path for global oil prices remains elevated. The most important considerations relate to OPEC policy and geopolitical risks to production. As well, US shale output could increase at a faster pace than expected.
 
The spread between WTI and Western Canadian Select has narrowed to around US$10. The spread is being compressed in part by mandatory production curtailments in Alberta. In addition, US sanctions against Venezuela have increased the demand for Canadian heavy oil.

The Bank’s non-energy commodity price index is about 3 per cent higher than in January. Many prices have risen because of improved market sentiment, with idiosyncratic supply factors providing additional support to the prices of base metals and hogs. However, Canadian canola prices have 
fallen following recent actions by the Chinese government.
	
Trade tensions and elevated uncertainty have been important drivers of the growth dynamic for both the global and Canadian economies, although some factors specific to Canada are playing a role. The Canadian economy was operating close to potential, then slowed in the fourth quarter of last year. After a soft patch at the beginning of 2019, economic growth is expected to pick up.

The dampening effects on growth of low oil prices, changes to housing policies and the 2017–18 increases in borrowing rates should dissipate over 2019. Improvements in financial conditions since the beginning of 2019, continuing strong immigration and sustained global expansion are expected to 
support growth over the projection horizon. The pace of economic activity is projected to increase from 1.2 per cent in 2019 to about 2 per cent in 2020 and 2021.

Compared with the projection in the January Report, the outlook for growth in 2019 has been revised down and is largely unchanged for 2020. The markdown reflects mainly that the economy in the fourth quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of 2019 was weaker than anticipated.

The Bank has reviewed its estimates of potential output growth and the neutral rate of interest. The midpoints of the ranges for both have been revised down slightly. Overall, the Bank judges that the 
economy was operating with modest excess capacity in the first quarter of 2019.

Core measures of inflation have continued to hover near 2 per cent. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation declined to 1.6 per cent in the first quarter of 2019, primarily reflecting past declines in gasoline prices. Through the projection horizon, inflation is expected to remain close to 2 per cent.

The pace of economic activity in the fourth quarter of 2018 was weaker than expected, although the impact of lower oil prices on GDP has been roughly in line with the Bank’s estimates. Business investment and exports were lower than anticipated, largely reflecting slower global demand and a greater impact from trade policy issues. Also, firms may have delayed investment spending in anticipation of the new Accelerated Investment Incentive announced in the federal government’s Fall Economic Statement. Further, past changes in housing policies together with the 2017–18 increases in borrowing rates appear to be having larger and more prolonged effects on residential investment and components of consumption that are sensitive to changes in interest rates.

Weak growth is estimated to have continued into the first quarter of 2019, with softness in several components of demand. Recent data indicate broad-based weakness in exports of goods. Ongoing adjustment in the oil and gas sector is estimated to have held back investment. Residential investment activity was also likely weak again in the first quarter, reflecting the ongoing transition in the composition of housing demand and construction to more affordable residences. At the same time, consumption is estimated to have strengthened, supported by strong income gains and elevated consumer confidence.

The slowing of growth has primarily occurred in goods-producing industries, such as construction as well as energy and its supporting activities. Since drivers of the recent weakness in trade are viewed as largely temporary, the Bank estimates that growth will pick up in the second quarter of 2019. The near-term outlook incorporates a large swing in inventories to reconcile mixed signals from production and expenditure indicators.

The Bank has revised its outlook for the first quarter of 2019 down relative to the January Report. Investment and export levels are lower, reflecting greater effects of uncertainty and weaker global demand. As well, activity in the housing market is expected to stabilize later than previously anticipated.
 
The Canadian economy was operating near capacity for most of 2017 and 2018. However, as a result of recent slow economic growth, the Bank estimates that the output gap was between -1.25 and -0.25 per cent in the first quarter of 2019. The degree of slack is not generalized across the entire economy since the slowing of activity is more concentrated in some industries and regions than in others.

In the spring Business Outlook Survey fewer firms reported capacity pressures as more intense compared with a year ago, in some cases because they have recently expanded production capacity or hired additional workers. The view that labour shortages have intensified has also become less widespread. 

Overall, the labour market continues to be healthy. The number of job vacancies was near its record high in the fourth quarter of 2018, and the pace of hiring has been strong, particularly in the services industry and outside oil-intensive regions.5 Regional differences are also evident in wage growth, which was about 1.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2018 in oil-intensive regions and 2.6 per cent in other provinces. Nationally, wages increased by 2.1 per cent.

Further evidence that the labour market is healthy shows up in wage increases for job changers. It is generally easier for workers to find jobs that better match their skill sets when demand for labour is strong and broad-based. When workers move to jobs that make better use of their skills, wage increases tend to reflect higher productivity and thus may not be inflationary. Empirical evidence indicates job changers have been receiving wage increases of about 12 per cent, considerably higher than the average increase.

Core inflation measures have been stable and close to 2 per cent for more than a year, consistent with an economy operating near capacity. CPI inflation has been considerably more volatile, reflecting the effects of temporary factors. In the first quarter of 2019, inflation eased to 1.6 per cent, largely because gasoline prices have continued to be lower than they were one year ago.

In this Report, the Bank provides its annual reassessment of potential output growth. The midpoint of the range for potential output growth is estimated to be slightly lower than in the April 2018 Report, at 1.8 per cent on average between 2019 and 2021 and at 1.9 per cent in 2022. Softer business investment relative to the April 2018 Report reduces the projected growth rate of trend labour productivity. This effect is largely offset by strong immigration, which boosts growth of the working-age population and contributes to a forecast of higher trend labour input growth.

Over time, growth of trend labour productivity is expected to improve as the drag on investment growth from the oil sector and elevated trade policy uncertainty wanes. Meanwhile, trend labour input growth will continue to slow because of population aging. The Bank’s assessment of potential output is subject to considerable uncertainty. The estimates are presented as a range that captures some of the uncertainty.

GDP growth is expected to increase from 1.2 per cent in 2019 to about 2.0 per cent in 2020 and 2021. The Bank projects that the economy will gradually strengthen through 2019 and will grow slightly above potential in 2020 and 2021.

The steady expansion of services industries is expected to continue and plays an integral role driving solid job gains and income growth. In this context, the rebound in GDP growth in the base-case projection mainly reflects an improvement in goods industries. In particular, by 2020, the adjustment to previous declines in oil prices or past changes to housing policies will no longer weigh on growth.

Compared with that in the January Report, the projection for economic growth in 2019 has been marked down by 0.5 percentage points. About one-third of this change reflects the weaker-than-expected growth at the end of 2018, and most of the rest is due to the downward revision to growth in the first half of 2019. For 2020, the projection for growth remains broadly unchanged.

Overall, trade tensions and related uncertainty, weaker foreign demand and past housing policies are having somewhat greater adverse effects on the forecasted profile for output than previously anticipated. In addition, the contribution of fiscal spending to growth has been marked down. The new federal budget and provincial budgets for Quebec and British Columbia are each somewhat positive for economic activity. However, the new Ontario budget has considerably less spending than was assumed in the projection in the January Report. The January assumption was largely based on the multi-year trajectory embedded in the 2018 Ontario budget. The effects of all of these developments are only partially offset by those associated with higher commodity prices and more favourable financing conditions.

The outlook for consumption and housing is underpinned by strong employment and solid wage gains. By 2020, provincial and municipal housing market policies and tighter mortgage finance guidelines are no longer expected to slow household spending growth.
 
In addition, the improvement in financial conditions has a positive influence on spending. For instance, with the recent easing of household borrowing rates, mortgage payments of households renegotiating their five-year fixed-rate mortgages would be expected to rise by less than in the illustration in Box 3 of the July 2018 Report.

Consumption is expected to grow moderately. Elevated indebtedness together with concerns about changing house prices are anticipated to contribute to households becoming more cautious in their consumption decisions. In oil-intensive regions, the ongoing adjustment of the energy sector is expected to continue to dampen household spending. The profile for consumption overall is consistent with a savings rate that is increasing from a low level over the projection horizon.

National housing metrics are anticipated to mask regional differences through 2019. For instance, the effects on growth of the revised B-20 guideline are expected to dissipate in many markets, although they could persist longer in areas with elevated house prices and that have been subject to other changes to housing policies. The stabilization of expectations for house prices in British Columbia and Ontario may indicate a forthcoming stabilization and subsequent increase in resale activity. The 
changes to municipal and provincial policies to address speculation, combined with the B-20 revisions, are having more pronounced effects in the Greater Vancouver Area (GVA) than in the Greater Toronto Area. Thus, while stabilization of activity is expected this year in the base-case projection, there is a risk that it could be delayed in the GVA. Meanwhile, ongoing challenges in the oil industry are expected to continue to weigh on the Alberta housing market. In contrast, a strong economy and investor interest is expected to boost the market in Montréal.

The First-Time Home Buyer Incentive introduced in the 2019 federal budget is expected to support housing demand and may also lead to improving sentiment in the housing market. However, delays in purchases by homebuyers who want to take advantage of the new measure could influence the timing of resale activity in 2019.

After declining for two years, residential investment is expected to expand modestly in 2020 and 2021. Given the trend reduction in housing affordability, construction of multi-unit residences is expected to resume its trend increase to meet demand for less-expensive homes.

The Bank expects a gradual expansion in investment outside the oil and gas sector starting in the first half of 2019, with solid growth in the second half of the year and continuing through the projection horizon. Business investment should be motivated by capacity constraints, elevated operating profits, favourable financing costs and the federal and Ontario governments’ investment incentives. This forecast continues to incorporate judgment that elevated uncertainty is holding back investment. In the projection, trade uncertainty is assumed to reduce the level of business investment by about 2.5 per cent by the end of 2021.

In the spring Business Outlook Survey, firms not exposed to the energy sector reported intentions to increase capital spending to meet anticipated demand and improve productivity, though many cited regulatory hurdles or uncertainty. These spending intentions were particularly concentrated among services-oriented firms. The survey results are consistent with the view that ongoing digitalization of business activity is encouraging capital spending in areas such as research and development, software and computer equipment.

The oil and gas sector continues to undergo structural adjustment. The Bank expects that the level of investment in the oil and gas sector in 2019 will be about 20 per cent lower than its 2017 plateau. This contraction follows the steep decline of roughly 50 per cent that occurred between 
2014 and 2016.

Developments in the sector have dampened business sentiment. For instance, several firms in the Prairies responding to the spring Business Outlook Survey cited uncertainty around the outlook for the sector, as well as transportation constraints and other industry-specific regulations, as impediments to investment. Following the 2019 decline, energy investment is anticipated to remain relatively stable over the remainder of the projection horizon.

Energy exports are expected to decline in 2019 and then recover and grow moderately over the remainder of the projection horizon. The Bank assumes that oil production and exports will correspond roughly to the available transportation capacity. Production curtailments have been eased and are assumed to be phased out in the future. In this context, the Bank’s projections for production and exports of Canadian oil are anchored by transportation capacity rather than by an assumption about the price of Western Canadian Select. The Enbridge Line 3 replacement program has been delayed until the end of 2020, and crude-by-rail shipments are expected to expand. Rail is anticipated to be the marginal mode of transportation for Canadian oil exports.

Global trade policies and challenges related to competitiveness are anticipated to continue to be impediments to exports. In addition, the Bank assumes that trade uncertainty reduces the level of exports by about 1.2 per cent by the end of 2021.11 Nevertheless, growth of non-commodity exports is projected to be broad-based outside the auto sector. The expansion of foreign demand and rising production capacity will support moderate growth.

Exports of services are forecast to continue growing at a strong pace, further increasing services’ share of non-commodity exports. In particular, travel services, which includes tuition and other spending in Canada by foreign students, and foreign sales of commercial services should be important contributors to export growth. Exports of goods, excluding autos, are expected to pick up over the projection horizon, supported by growing US private demand.

Non-energy commodity exports are expected to grow modestly, generally benefiting from higher global prices. For example, some agricultural exports are projected to increase as global demand and prices for food rise. Nevertheless, trade conflicts are affecting some agricultural industries, particularly in 2019. For instance, a Chinese ban of canola imports from major Canadian producers led to a decline in Canadian canola prices and is expected to weigh on exports.

After expanding in 2018, imports are expected to decline slightly in 2019, mainly reflecting softer domestic demand and the contraction of the auto sector. Import growth should then increase gradually over the remainder of the projection horizon, consistent with the pickup in business investment growth.

The return of CPI inflation to close to 2 per cent is expected to occur earlier than in the January Report. With oil prices somewhat firmer than previously assumed, the drag from gasoline prices is now anticipated to be smaller.

However, gasoline prices are expected to contribute negatively to inflation through most of 2019. Meanwhile, a temporary surge in airfare and the implementation of the new federal carbon pollution charge on fossil fuels are anticipated to provide a modest boost to inflation. As a result, inflation is expected to be close to 2 per cent in the second quarter of 2019.
 
Inflation is forecast to remain close to 2 per cent through 2020 and 2021. Modest excess capacity is expected to subtract about 0.1 percentage point from inflation in 2020, while the annual increase in the federal carbon pollution charge adds less than 0.1 percentage point.

The base-case projection provides the Bank’s view of the most likely outcome for inflation, although any projection is subject to considerable uncertainty. Based on the past distribution of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. A complementary perspective is provided using statistical analysis of the Bank’s forecast errors. This perspective suggests that a 50 per cent confidence band around the base-case projection widens from ±0.2 percentage points in the second quarter of 2019 to ±0.6 percentage 
points by the end of 2021. Over the same period, a 90 per cent confidence band widens from ±0.6 to ±1.4 percentage points.

The projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. Almost all respondents to the spring Business Outlook Survey continue to anticipate inflation will remain within the Bank’s target range of 1 to 3 per cent over the next two years, although more now expect inflation to be in the lower half of the range. The March 2019 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 1.7 per cent in 2019 and 2.0 per cent in 2020. Responses to a quarterly question on long-term inflation expectations show an average of 1.9 per cent through 2029.
	
The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks. Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. The evolution since January of some of the key risks is summarized in Table 4. As in past reports, the focus is on those risks 
identified as the most important to the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks considered in the projection.

This risk relates to trade policy conflicts between the United States and its trading partners, the fact that the Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement (CUSMA) has yet to be ratified and the further 
extension of Brexit negotiations. 

If tensions persist or escalate, Canadian exports and business investment could suffer from additional weakening in foreign demand, a disruption in global value chains, falling business confidence and lower commodity prices. At the same time, inflationary pressures could result from a lower Canadian dollar or the increase in global input costs associated with higher tariffs and lower productivity.

If the United States and China were to reach a broad agreement on trade issues, global and Canadian economic activity would be stronger than in the base-case projection. As well, the near-term upward pressure on prices from tariffs would be removed.

US GDP growth could be stronger than in the base-case projection if recent US tax and regulatory changes boost US investment and potential output growth by more than anticipated. It is also possible that additional US fiscal stimulus measures could be enacted to avoid a material decline in growth in 2020. Canadian investment and exports would both benefit from stronger US activity.

Financial conditions could tighten suddenly through an increase in government bond yields or a repricing of corporate credit, possibly triggered by higher-than-expected inflation in a major advanced economy. Higher bond yields in advanced economies could lead to large capital outflows from EMEs, exacerbating country-specific vulnerabilities in some cases. These developments could translate into a rise in debt-service burdens, a decline in activity in sectors sensitive to interest rates, lower commodity prices and weaker global and Canadian economic growth.
	
While consumption growth has slowed markedly in recent quarters, persistently elevated consumer confidence and solid labour income growth could lead to stronger consumer spending over the projection horizon. This outcome would be accompanied by a flat savings rate or one that has a more moderate increase than in the base-case projection. However, the vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness would be exacerbated if the additional spending were financed by more borrowing. This would increase the impact on consumption of an adverse shock in the longer term.
	
High levels of public and private debt in some major economies could pose a greater-than-expected drag on the growth prospects of the global economy. Countries with a high public debt could face fiscal consolidation. In addition, structural adjustment in some economies could hold back growth. Weaker global demand could lead to a decrease in commodity prices and would restrain growth of Canadian investment and exports.

Although partially realized and incorporated into a weaker outlook for housing in the base-case projection, further downside risks remain. Pronounced weakness in residential investment points to 
the possibility that policy changes could have even greater and more prolonged effects than previously expected. If this were the case, housing demand would be weaker than in the base-case projection. This weaker demand would put additional downward pressure on house prices, notably in markets where imbalances remain. The result could be mutually reinforcing declines in house prices, housing resales and construction.
	
