Trade conflicts are weakening the world economy. Global economic growth is expected to slow to below 3 percent in 2019, its weakest pace since the 2007–09 global economic and financial crisis. The slowdown has been most pronounced in business investment and the manufacturing sector and has coincided with a contraction in global trade. Despite the manufacturing slowdown, unemployment rates continue to be near historical lows in many advanced economies, as growth in employment in service sectors has remained resilient.

The United States and China have announced additional trade actions since the July Monetary Policy Report. Although negotiations have recently shown some signs of progress, global uncertainty has been increasing. These factors have contributed to a further deterioration in growth prospects and a fall in commodity prices. In response to weaker outlooks and lower inflation expectations, many central banks have eased monetary policy. These central bank actions have helped maintain financial conditions that support growth.

Growth is projected to strengthen modestly to around 31/4 percent by 2021, with a pickup in some emerging-market economies (EMEs) more than offsetting slower growth in the United States and China.

A slowdown in business investment and trade was expected following an unsustainably strong performance in 2017 and early 2018, but trade conflicts have been a further drag. Tariff increases and retaliatory measures have raised firms’ costs, disrupted global supply chains, created uncertainty about future trade relationships and reduced business confidence.

The Bank estimates that trade measures and related uncertainty would remove about 1.3 percent from the level of global gross domestic product (GDP) by the end of 2021 in the absence of any monetary policy actions. This estimate is about 0.5 percentage points larger than it was in the July Report.

Sector-specific developments, notably in auto and consumer electronics industries, have also contributed to the underperformance of global business investment. 

More than 35 central banks in advanced economies and EMEs have eased monetary policy since the July Report in reaction to weakening growth prospects and soft inflation expectations. Markets are expecting further monetary policy easing in upcoming months.

The ongoing trade war between the United States and China has raised investor appetite for high-quality assets since July. At the same time, investors continue to search for yield in the global low interest rate environment. As a result, the demand for US government bonds has increased. US bond yields are, on balance, down but have increased from their recent lows. Yields in other major jurisdictions are about the same as in July. The higher demand for US assets has also contributed to the ongoing strength of the US dollar against other major currencies. Meanwhile, the Canadian dollar has traded in a narrow range against the US dollar while appreciating against other currencies.

Other financial indicators, including equity prices and credit spreads, remain close to their July levels even though global growth prospects have deteriorated. This may reflect the effects of additional monetary policy stimulus. Overall, financial market indicators are consistent with a modest cyclical slowing of global activity.

The US economy has been growing at a moderate pace, supported by robust consumer spending, a strong labour market and healthy wage gains. In addition, after a prolonged period of weakness, the housing market is showing signs of improvement. However, rising trade protectionism has increased uncertainty in the business environment. Growth in manufacturing production, an important source of demand for Canadian exports, has decreased over the past year, and business investment has slowed sharply. The decline in manufacturing production has been broad-based, including significant weakness in sectors that rely on Chinese imports, such as chemicals and machinery. Activity in sectors that are less affected by the trade conflict, such as services, has remained relatively resilient.

Core personal consumption expenditure price inflation rose to 1.8 percent in August, from about 1.5 percent earlier in the year. Looking ahead, the tariff increases on Chinese imports announced in August target a larger share of consumer products than previous rounds did. These increases are therefore expected to have a greater impact on consumer prices.

The US Federal Reserve provided additional monetary stimulus to mitigate the adverse impacts of global developments amid muted inflation expectations. As well, the new US federal budget agreement raises the level of government spending relative to what was assumed in the July Report. Overall, the outlook for GDP growth is little changed from July, with growth moderating toward potential over the projection horizon.

Recent indicators point to weaker growth in the euro area than anticipated in the July Report. Global trade developments and other geopolitical risks are weighing on business confidence and on exports. A contraction in manufacturing output, and particularly disruptions in the auto sector, has raised the risk of a recession in Germany. So far, household spending and employment in the non-manufacturing sector have been relatively resilient, particularly in regions less dependent on exports.

Core inflation and inflation expectations remain tepid. In response to the modest growth outlook and persistent weakness in inflation, the European Central Bank has cut its deposit facility rate and restarted asset purchases (quantitative easing). In this context, GDP growth is expected to average about 1 percent in 2019 and 2020, before rising to close to 11/2 percent in 2021.
 
The Chinese economy has been facing important domestic and external headwinds. Financial system vulnerabilities from high debt levels remain a concern. Regulatory efforts to address them have dampened growth. This drag has been exacerbated by the escalating trade dispute with the United States. Although policy support has provided some offset, industrial production and investment in private fixed assets have slowed over the past 
year. This has led to a contraction in imports of manufactured products and non-petroleum raw materials. The increase in tariffs since July, as well as related uncertainty, will likely have a further adverse effect on China’s economy.

GDP growth remains subdued in other oil-importing EMEs. Economic activity in emerging Asia has been restrained by the manufacturing slowdown in China and by weak demand for electronic goods. India’s economy is being constrained by a credit crunch, and growth remains weak in Latin America. Growth in EMEs is nonetheless expected to improve modestly over the projection horizon as economic activity normalizes in India and Latin America.

In oil-exporting countries, growth is expected to pick up over the projection horizon. Oil production should stabilize following cuts implemented by some members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) at the start of 2019.

Many commodity prices have decreased since July due to concerns over global demand. Changing market perceptions about the status of US–China trade talks also drove sharp fluctuations in some commodity prices. The recent average for the price of Brent crude oil, the global benchmark, is US$5 per barrel lower than assumed in the July Report. The decrease occurred despite the attacks on processing facilities in Saudi Arabia, which temporarily disrupted production and increased regional tensions. Meanwhile, the price of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil has remained relatively unchanged, as new pipeline capacity in the United States improved access to markets.

Uncertainty around future oil prices remains elevated. Prices could fall further if OPEC members decide to relax production cuts in 2020. However, an escalation of geopolitical tensions in the Middle East would put upward pressure on prices.

The spread between WTI and Western Canadian Select has remained close to US$15 since July. Oil inventories in Western Canada have fallen over the past six months despite an easing in the mandatory production curtailments in Alberta. This drop is due to a pickup in shipments by rail.

Global growth concerns have also put downward pressure on the prices of many base metals. One exception is the price of nickel, which has risen by about 40 percent since July. This change reflects more restrictive export policies from Indonesia, a key supplier.

The Canadian economy grew at a moderate pace over the past year, supported by a healthy labour market and the recent turnaround in housing. However, global trade conflicts and related uncertainty dampened business investment and export activities, and investment in the energy sector continued to decline. The impact on growth of both global headwinds and energy transportation constraints is expected to diminish, and the pace of economic expansion should gradually pick up in 2020 and 2021.

The overall picture masks volatility across quarters. Growth in the second quarter was particularly strong. The Bank estimates, however, that it is being pulled down in the second half of 2019 by an outright decline in exports and business investment.

In 2020 and 2021, Canada’s economy is anticipated to grow near potential. Consumer spending is projected to increase at a steady pace, and housing activity to continue its ongoing recovery. Overall, investment and exports are anticipated to grow moderately. In the energy sector, investment is forecast to stabilize, and oil exports should improve as pipeline and rail capacity gradually expands.

Compared with the projection in the July Report, economic growth has been revised up for 2019, but revised down for 2020 and 2021. Altogether, the level of GDP is slightly lower at the end of 2021. The adjustment for 2019 reflects a surprise surge in exports in the second quarter, which resulted largely from temporary factors. In 2020 and 2021, weaker foreign demand, additional trade policy uncertainty and the lower spending profile in the new Alberta budget weigh on growth. Lower mortgage rates and the larger working-age population provide a partial offset.
 
Consistent with an economy that, outside the oil-producing regions, appears to have been operating close to potential, measures of core inflation have been hovering near 2 percent. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation is also expected to remain close to target over the projection horizon.
	
The economy grew by 3.7 percent in the second quarter of 2019, after two weak quarters. This rebound was driven by a temporary surge in both energy and some non-energy exports. In contrast, final domestic demand shrank, and the pace of inventory accumulation slowed, both subtracting significantly from growth.

The Bank estimates that real GDP will expand by only about 11/4 percent in the second half of 2019. The oil sector continues to face transportation challenges and production constraints. Outside this sector, weakness in foreign demand, escalating global trade conflicts and geopolitical tensions are weighing heavily on business investment and 
exports. Further, the strike of autoworkers in the United States and the scheduled end of vehicle production at the General Motors plant in Oshawa, Ontario, are suppressing activity in the auto industry.

In contrast, employment and wage gains have been and are expected to remain resilient, supported by robust activity in the service sector. Consumer spending is estimated to increase by about 1¾ percent, near its average pace over the past four quarters. In addition, housing starts and resales are growing strongly as housing recovers from a period of adjustment to policies introduced in 2016–18.

Housing markets generally reflect regional economic conditions. Housing starts and resales have been particularly robust in Quebec and Ontario, where labour markets have been strong. These provinces will likely continue to be the main drivers of the growth in residential investment. In Alberta, where the oil industry is expected to stabilize, modest improvements in housing are expected. In British Columbia, residential investment has recovered in recent months and should remain near current levels, reflecting the creation of new households.

The Bank estimates that the Canadian output gap was between 0 and -1 percent in the third quarter. Evidence of excess capacity persists in energy-producing regions. Elsewhere, indicators of capacity pressures and labour shortages show few signs of slack. In the autumn Business Outlook Survey, firms reported that capacity pressures were mostly labour-related and that labour markets tightened in most regions.

National measures of labour market conditions continue to be healthy. The unemployment rate stands near its historical low, and the participation rate of prime-age workers is near its historical high. Job creation remains robust, especially in the service sector. Employment gains have been strongest for full-time jobs, particularly in mid- and high-paying positions. However, regional differences are evident in the Canadian labour market. 

For example, in Alberta, conditions have been weak—the unemployment rate remains relatively elevated, and job growth is slower than in other regions.

In line with national labour market conditions, growth of wages has picked up. Overall, the Bank’s composite measure of wages, the wage-common, is estimated to have risen further in the third quarter to 3 percent, from 2.3 percent in the first half of the year. In energy-producing regions, wage growth has increased recently and is now in line with the national average.

Core and CPI inflation have remained near 2 percent. CPI inflation in the third quarter was 1.9 percent, higher than expected in the July Report, largely reflecting higher airfare and prices of vegetables and cellphones. The Bank estimates that CPI inflation will remain close to the 2 percent target in the fourth quarter.
 
The Bank anticipates that economic growth will gradually improve in 2020 and 2021 to around potential. Rising incomes and the recent decline in mortgage interest rates are expected to support growth in consumer spending and housing. Businesses are anticipated 
to adjust to an environment of elevated uncertainty, and oil transportation capacity is forecast to increase. With these developments, growth in business investment and exports is expected to re-emerge at a moderate pace. Nevertheless, investment as a share of GDP should remain low. 

Trade tensions and the related uncertainty are affecting the Canadian economy both directly and indirectly. They are adding directly to the drag on investment and exports through greater uncertainty and lower business confidence in Canada. The indirect impacts are stemming from international sources, which affect the Canadian economy primarily through weaker foreign demand for Canadian exports and lower commodity prices. The Bank estimates that, together, the direct and indirect impacts would remove about 2 percent from the level of Canadian GDP by the end of 2021 in the absence of any policy actions.6 This impact is about 0.4 percentage points larger than was estimated in July.

Both business investment and exports are expected to resume their expansion in 2020. The projection for business investment and exports reflects soft growth in foreign demand and is restrained by trade policy uncertainty and competitiveness challenges.

In the oil and gas sector, improving transportation capacity, along with the easing of production constraints, is expected to support a rebound in production. Thus, energy exports are expected to pick up in 2020 and 2021. Moreover, as business sentiment gradually improves in line with the expansion of transportation capacity, investment is anticipated to stabilize in 2020 and expand in 2021. The sector’s share in total business investment is anticipated to remain at about half of what it was in 2014, before the sharp decline in oil prices.

Outside the oil and gas sector, the drag on growth of business investment from trade policy uncertainty, as well as from delays in the delivery of the Boeing 737 MAX aircraft, is expected to dissipate.8 The strength of the service sector and the digitalization of the economy will continue to support investment. For instance, recent announcements of new direct investments suggest that Canada is attracting investments by foreign firms in knowledge-intensive fields, including software and digital services (e.g., video games, smartphone applications, web content and custom computer programming 
services) and related business services. In addition, the LNG Canada project will continue to boost spending in the transportation sector.

This gradual improvement is consistent with the responses to the autumn Business Outlook Survey. Almost half the firms reported intentions to increase investment spending, often in technologies that improve productivity. Nonetheless, exporters had modest investment intentions, with fewer firms than in recent surveys saying foreign demand supports their capital spending plans.

The outlook for non-energy exports is mixed across categories. Overall growth in non-energy commodity exports is projected to remain subdued, despite a rebound in exports of steel and aluminum products following the end of the North American tariffs. Among non-commodity categories, growth of exports of services and consumer goods excluding automobiles should remain strong, while that of machinery and equipment is expected to be soft. In addition, motor vehicle production and exports are likely to decline further because Canadian motor vehicle assemblers are reducing production in response to both mandate changes and softening sales.

After slowing in the second half of 2019, import growth should recover in 2020 and 2021, in line with the rise in business investment and exports.

Over the projection horizon, household spending is expected to be supported by solid growth of disposable income, lower rates for mortgages and a larger working-age population. With the lower mortgage rates, households renewing their mortgages are no longer facing sizable increases in interest payments.

However, given their high levels of debt, households are expected to be cautious in their spending decisions. Consumer spending is therefore projected to grow at a somewhat slower pace than disposable income. As a result, the projection includes a gradual increase in the savings rate from current low levels, and the ratio of household debt to disposable income is anticipated to edge down. Nonetheless, while household sector vulnerabilities are expected to ease, they should remain elevated over the projection 
horizon.

Housing activity is anticipated to continue to recover toward a level consistent with solid income, low borrowing costs and a growing population. This recovery should result in strong growth of residential investment of about 5 percent in 2020. Subsequently, housing activity is expected to slow to a pace roughly in line with underlying housing demand. In 2021, residential investment is expected to expand by about 1 percent.

The Bank forecasts CPI inflation will be around the 2 percent target over the projection horizon. Economic slack is expected to be a source of modest downward pressure on inflation that is largely offset by a small boost from the federal carbon pollution charge. In 2020, inflation is expected to decrease temporarily due to a renewed drag from energy prices.
 
The base-case projection provides the Bank’s view of the most likely outcome for inflation, although any projection is subject to considerable uncertainty. Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the projection for CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. A complementary perspective is provided using statistical analysis of the Bank’s forecast errors, which suggests that a 50 percent confidence interval around the base-case projection widens from ±0.2 percentage 
points in the fourth quarter of 2019 to ±0.6 percentage points by the end of 2021. Over the same period, a 90 percent confidence band widens from ±0.6 to ±1.4 percentage points. 

The projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. Almost all firms responding to the Business Outlook Survey anticipate that inflation will remain within the Bank’s target range of 1 to 3 percent over the next two years. Most respondents expect inflation to be in the bottom half of the target range. The September 2019 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.0 percent in 2019 and 2020. Responses to a quarterly question on long-term inflation expectations show an average of 1.9 percent through 2029. 
	
The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks. The most important risk to the Canadian economy continues to be around global trade policies and related uncertainty. Because the Bank’s base-case scenario incorporates the adverse effects of announced tariffs and elevated uncertainty, the trade policy risk is two-sided but tilted to the downside.

If current trade disputes were resolved and if increases in tariffs introduced over the past two years were reversed, economic activity and inflation would be stronger. Alternatively, trade conflicts could escalate further or become widespread, which would negatively affect Canadian GDP. The net effect of increased trade tensions on Canadian inflation would depend on a number of factors. While weaker aggregate demand would reduce inflationary pressures, a weaker Canadian dollar and lower productivity would push up inflation. Moreover, any tariff increases would also have a direct effect on import prices.

Protectionist trade policies work through the supply side by limiting capacity and pushing up prices. The recent experience of a marked slowdown in real activity and soft inflation suggests the uncertainty associated with trade conflict and unresolved negotiations are also weighing importantly on demand. This Report considers an illustrative scenario with greater global uncertainty driving additional global weakness than in the base case. The scenario illustrates the channels through which economic activity and inflation in Canada would be affected.

Aside from trade policy, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. As in past reports, the focus is on those risks identified as the most important to the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks considered in the projection. Table 4 summarizes the evolution of some of the key risks since July.

Risk premiums have remained tight even as growth concerns have increased. Given the growing evidence that global trade conflicts and related uncertainty are taking a toll on economic activity, market prices could adjust rapidly. A sharp increase of risk premiums and tightening of other financial conditions could also lead to capital outflows from stressed EMEs. These developments could translate into weaker global and Canadian growth.

The base-case projection incorporates cautious behaviour on the part of consumers, with a gradual increase in the savings rate. However, the recent strength in wages and employment could boost consumer confidence and lead to stronger consumption over the projection horizon.

Recent strong growth in employment and the decrease in mortgage rates could spur more demand for housing than in the base-case scenario. Stronger housing demand could put additional pressures on already elevated house prices, increase borrowing and raise household vulnerabilities.

In China, implementing further policy stimulus to offset the negative effects of ongoing trade conflicts without causing a pickup in private credit growth could be challenging. Additionally, recovery in other oil-importing EMEs could be more sluggish than in the base case. In particular, the credit crunch in India and ongoing political challenges 
in some EMEs could have larger and more persistent effects. Such developments could put downward pressure on commodity prices.

Inflation has been persistently below target in many countries. In this context, import prices may contribute to a softer outlook for Canadian inflation than in the base-case projection.
