Inflation continues to fall globally, but core inflation in major economies remains elevated. In response, several central banks have raised—or signalled they will raise—their policy rates further. 

Global economic growth in the first half of 2023 was stronger than had been expected at the beginning of the year, with surprisingly robust US consumption growth. Growth in global demand should moderate over the next year due to monetary policy tightening and a slowdown in China. 

In Canada, inflation has continued to come down. Consumer price index (CPI) inflation was 3.4% in May. This represents significant progress toward price stability over the past year as inflation has steadily dropped from a high of 8.1% last summer. 

However, the downward momentum in inflation is slowing, largely because demand in Canada continues to outpace supply. Household spending has been robust, supported by strong demand for labour, population growth and accumulated household savings. Housing resales and house prices have picked up. At the same time, business investment is softening. Labour market conditions remain tight but appear to be easing. 

Growth in gross domestic product (GDP) is projected to slow, averaging about 1% in the second half of this year and the first half of next year. This implies GDP growth of 1.8% in 2023 and 1.2% in 2024. As the cumulative interest rate increases work their way through the economy, they will weigh on household spending and business investment. Weak foreign demand is also expected to slow export growth. GDP growth is projected to gradually pick up starting in the second half of 2024, reaching 2.4% in 2025.

Inflation is now projected to remain around 3% over the next year. As excess demand dissipates and labour market conditions ease, inflation gradually returns to the 2% target in the middle of 2025. This is about two quarters later than forecast in the January and April reports.

A considerable amount of uncertainty surrounds the forecast, particularly into 2024 and 2025. Three-month rates of core inflation have stayed in the 3½% to 4% range for some time. While near-term inflation expectations are easing, they remain high. And excess demand has been more persistent than expected. All this suggests increased risk that the progress toward price stability could stall.
	
Inflation continues to fall in most regions, but core inflation—especially for services—is proving to be stubborn. Tight labour markets, robust consumer demand and elevated inflation expectations are generating persistent inflationary pressures in many economies. In response, several major central banks have raised their policy rates further or signalled more increases are likely.

Global economic growth has been stronger than expected. This is especially the case in the United States, Canada’s largest trading partner. US consumer spending has been surprisingly strong because households continued to draw down savings accumulated during the pandemic, and a tight labour market has supported incomes. US business investment has also been unexpectedly robust. In contrast, economic growth in the euro area has been weak, largely as expected.

Over the next year, global economic growth is projected to slow as monetary policy further restricts demand. In the United States, fiscal policy restraint and reduced spending from pandemic-related savings also weigh on demand growth. At the same time, the pace of economic activity in China is expected to slow as the boost from the lifting of pandemic restrictions wanes and growth of external demand moderates. Global growth is projected to pick up modestly in the second half of 2024 before strengthening in 2025, as the effects of higher interest rates on economic growth dissipate.

Inflation is projected to ease as demand growth slows. Lower goods price inflation leads this decline, while services price inflation adjusts more gradually. By the end of 2025, inflation is projected to approach central bank targets. However, the speed of this decline remains uncertain. 
	
Global financial conditions are now modestly tighter than they were at the start of the year. Yields on government bonds across advanced economies have risen as central banks have increased policy rates and markets have priced in a more prolonged tightening. Equity returns have risen, mostly driven by a small number of technology stocks.

The value of the Canadian dollar is little changed against its US counterpart, but it has appreciated against a broader basket of currencies.

Inflation has been declining due to falling energy prices, easing supply constraints and tighter monetary policy. However, core inflation is not yet on a firm downward trend. In many countries, high core inflation reflects persistently strong inflation in core services prices.
 
Over the projection horizon, inflation is expected to ease toward central bank targets in response to tighter monetary conditions and the resulting slowdown in demand growth. This pace of adjustment reflects the sluggish response of prices for services. Strong demand for services, tight labour markets and elevated expectations for near-term inflation are all keeping services price inflation stubbornly high.   

In contrast, inflation in core goods prices is expected to come down faster. Demand for manufactured goods is relatively soft, energy prices have declined, and supply chain challenges have been dissipating. 

Despite the surprising strength of US consumption and investment spending during the first half of 2023, economic growth in the United States is slowing. Growth is projected to stall in the first half of 2024 due to restrictive monetary conditions, tighter fiscal policy and less support from accumulated savings. As spending wanes, unemployment starts to rise and wage growth eases. Slowing US economic activity and the rebalancing in consumption away from goods toward services are projected to weaken demand for imports, including from Canada. In the second half of 2024 and in 2025, US economic growth increases as the impact of tightening of monetary policy fades. 

Economic growth in the euro area effectively stalled over the first half of the year. Weak consumer sentiment, declining purchasing power and the tightening of monetary policy are weighing on domestic demand. The manufacturing sector is contracting as foreign demand for goods is slowing. At the same time, activity in the services sector has been robust as households continue to catch up on services they missed out on during the pandemic.

Economic growth is projected to remain weak through mid-2024 as monetary policy continues to dampen demand and bring inflation back toward the European Central Bank’s target. Growth then strengthens in 2025.

After surging earlier in the year, China’s growth is slowing. The rebound in activity in the services sector that followed the lifting of COVID-19 restrictions resulted in a more rapid pickup in growth than had been expected earlier this year. But the rebound is now fading faster than previously projected. Slowing global growth is weighing on exports, especially of manufactured goods, and domestic confidence is low. Additionally, the property sector remains weakened by past overbuilding. 

In the projection, policy easing is assumed to provide some support to the economy through 2024. Growth slows in 2025 due to a shrinking workforce and slowing business investment.

Oil prices have declined further over the past three months, with the price of Brent oil generally around US$75 per barrel. The fall in oil prices largely reflects market concerns that weakness in future global industrial activity will restrain demand. 

However, oil prices would likely rise if demand evolved in line with the Bank of Canada’s projection for global growth and oil supply did not keep up. To better balance these risks, the Bank assumes Brent oil prices to be US$80 per barrel over the projection. 

Natural gas prices have been relatively stable for several months compared with the volatility in 2022. Base metal prices have fallen, mostly in response to weak activity in China’s housing market and industrial sector. Other non-energy commodity prices are roughly unchanged.

Considerable progress has been made in the Bank’s efforts to return inflation back to the 2% target. Inflation fell from a peak of 8.1% last summer to 3.4% in May 2023. 

Economic activity—especially household spending—has proven surprisingly strong, supported by tight labour markets, rapid population growth and the high level of accumulated household savings. Consumption growth in the first quarter of 2023, at 5.8%, was stronger than expected. This strength was observed both in goods that are sensitive to interest rates and in services. Housing resales and house prices also picked up earlier than anticipated. At the same time, the labour market remained tight, having eased only mildly since the beginning of the year.

Economic growth is projected to moderate to an average of about 1% through the second half of 2023 and the first half of 2024. This slowdown results from the effects of higher interest rates on household spending and business investment as well as the fading of some 
temporary factors. Weak foreign demand also restrains export growth. In the second half of 2024, GDP growth is expected to pick up as the effect of higher interest rates on economic growth dissipates. Foreign demand also strengthens, boosting exports. 

Going forward, further easing of inflation will likely take longer than expected in previous reports, with inflation projected to remain near 3% for the next year. Greater excess demand and more stubborn core inflation are sustaining underlying price pressures. Tight monetary policy weighs on demand growth, and the economy is projected to enter into mild excess supply in the beginning of 2024. Inflation should then ease, reaching the 2% target in the middle of 2025. The return of inflation to target is expected to occur two quarters later than previously projected.

CPI inflation in Canada has declined from 8.1% in June 2022 to 3.4% in May. Inflation has been easing with lower energy prices, improvements in global supply chains and the effects of higher interest rates moving through the economy. In recent months, rising refinery margins have mitigated some of the impact of lower oil prices on inflation. Because energy prices in particular can cause significant volatility in inflation, gauging underlying inflationary pressures by examining measures of core inflation is useful. 

Core inflation continues to edge down, but that is due largely to base-year effects as the large price increases from last spring drop from the year-over-year calculations. In contrast, three-month rates of core inflation have stalled in the range of 3½% to 4% since September 2022, which is almost 1 percentage point above the Bank’s expectations in January. 

Other three-month rates of inflation show a similar pattern, with little to no progress since the summer of 2022.

The stubbornness of core inflation in Canada suggests that inflation may be more persistent than originally thought. A similar pattern exists in other economies.
	
Economic activity was robust in the first quarter of 2023, and growth over the first half of the year will likely surpass expectations at the time of the January Report. An increase in the population due to strong inflows of newcomers to Canada supported this growth.

Consumption spending per capita across a broad range of goods and services surged unexpectedly in the first quarter. Spending on interest-rate-sensitive goods such as furniture, clothing and recreational equipment was surprisingly strong. Based on recent retail sales data, strength in goods consumption seems to have continued. In addition, spending on services has been robust, continuing to recover from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Homebuyers have started returning to the resale market. In an environment of lagging supply, house prices increased in May for the second consecutive month (Chart 9, panel b). Increases in both resales and prices have been widespread across the country and stronger than anticipated in January. 

The unexpected strength of household spending over the first half of 2023 
appears to reflect several factors—some of which are temporary, while others 
could be persistent.
	
A tight labour market 
	
Population growth resulting from increased arrivals of newcomers to Canada
	
Accumulated household savings
	
Pent-up demand for services 
	
Fiscal measures in recent federal and provincial budgets  

Disentangling the effects from these factors is difficult. In the projection, the Bank tries to balance the risks around the outlook for household spending, but risks remain. 

An unexpected increase in exports, partly related to stronger-than-expected foreign demand, also supported economic activity and the labour market in the first half of 2023. As well, improvements in supply chains boosted shipments of motor vehicles abroad. 

With strong overall demand, the labour market remains tight. A broad range of indicators suggest that it is still above maximum sustainable employment. Labour demand remains strong, and job gains have been robust, with about 290,000 net new jobs created in the first six months of 2023. Many new entrants to the labour market have been hired quickly. The unemployment rate has edged up but remains low by historical standards. Wage growth has been in a range of about 4% to 5%.
	
At the same time, tighter monetary policy appears to be moderating the demand for labour. Job vacancies have declined since the January Report, and net job creation has been below the pace implied by population growth in recent months. As well, respondents to the Business Outlook Survey for the second quarter of 2023 noted that finding the workers they need has become easier. Firms attribute this to less competition for labour and improved labour supply. 
	
Economic growth in Canada is expected to moderate over the next year. Higher interest rates have raised debt-service costs and lowered the amount of money households and firms have available to spend on goods and services. Higher rates have raised the cost of new borrowing and slowed household credit growth. This has weighed on purchases of big-ticket items such as homes, motor vehicles and other consumer durables. When demand slows, production ultimately catches up. Both demand for labour and wage growth then ease, reinforcing the slowdown in overall demand. 

Exports are projected to decline as the impacts of higher rates abroad, particularly in the United States, weigh on the demand for imports from Canada. Moreover, the effect of some of the factors temporarily supporting export growth—such as the recovery of motor vehicle production with the resolution of supply chain issues—is anticipated to fade. 

Real GDP growth is estimated to have slowed in the second quarter of 2023 to 1.5% and is projected to moderate to an average of about 1% through the second half of 2023 and the first half of 2024. This is below population growth, which is expected to grow 1.9% on average over this period. Declines in real GDP per capita largely reflect per capita reductions in consumption and weak business investment.

Economic activity is projected to pick up in the second half of 2024 as the effects of monetary policy tightening on growth fade. GDP growth is expected to rise from 1.2% in 2024 to 2.4% in 2025.

Potential output growth is assumed to average about 2% over the projection horizon, reflecting solid growth in trend labour input and a pickup in trend labour productivity growth. The labour force is projected to expand robustly due to strong immigration and an ongoing influx of temporary residents, which more than offset the effects of an aging population.

While the Bank continues to expect a period of mild excess supply, this will take longer to materialize than previously anticipated. Excess demand is now projected to continue throughout 2023.

Growth in consumption spending is projected to slow over the next year as demand for interest-rate-sensitive goods and services weakens and more households renew their mortgage at higher rates. Income growth also slows as the labour market comes into balance, weighing on consumption spending growth.

After contracting for one year, spending on residential investment is expected to grow again, supported by strong inflows of newcomers to Canada. In recent months, house prices have moved up. This strength is projected to continue over the coming months before annual price growth slows to a range of 2% to 3%, roughly in line with the expectations of respondents to the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations for the second quarter of 2023. 

Business investment growth is expected to be soft through to the middle of 2024, dampened by weak demand for Canadian exports, high financing costs and the winding down of large infrastructure projects. Businesses cite elevated borrowing costs, tight credit conditions and the prospect of slowing economic activity as key factors holding back investment.

After a strong start to 2023, non-commodity exports are expected to decline through 2024 as foreign demand weakens. In contrast, commodity exports are projected to grow modestly, supported by supply improvements, including the completion of the Trans Mountain Expansion project in 2024.

CPI inflation declined to 3.4% in May and is expected to remain near 3% for about a year. The first stage of this decline in inflation—from about 8% in June 2022 to its current rate—occurred rapidly, reflecting large declines in oil prices, lower inflation in other goods prices and base-year effects as large past increases in these prices fall out. The drop in inflation for goods excluding food and energy resulted from slowing growth in global demand, improving supply chains and a decline in the costs of some imported goods. These factors are expected to continue to contribute to weaker inflation over the projection horizon, but their impact is shrinking.

Looking ahead, the next stage in the decline of inflation toward target is expected to take longer and is more uncertain. This is partly due to elevated services inflation, which can adjust sluggishly, and uncertainty about expected inflation. 

Slowing domestic demand is central to the anticipated decline in inflationary pressures. At the beginning of last year, strong excess demand in the context of rising costs made it easier for firms to fully pass cost increases onto prices. However, as the economy rebalances and the excess demand dissipates, not only will direct inflationary pressures from strong demand ease, but the ability of firms to pass along cost increases will also diminish. 

Results from the Bank’s Business Leaders’ Pulse survey indicate that firms continue to expect larger-than-normal price increases and more-frequent-than-normal price changes. The frequency of price changes, in particular, is greater when high inflation and demand are strong. However, firms’ responses are indicating that price-setting behaviour will continue to normalize. 

Firms responding to the Bank’s Business Outlook Survey for the second quarter of 2023 indicated that supply chains and labour shortages are becoming less pressing issues. Meanwhile, firms are increasingly concerned about slowing demand. In the face of strong wage gains, businesses are looking for opportunities to become more efficient and lower their costs. 

Inflation is expected to return to 2% in the middle of 2025, although the timing is uncertain given the gradual movement of inflation toward the target in the outlook. The delayed return to target largely reflects the greater persistence of excess demand in 2023, the upward revision to house prices and, to a lesser extent, higher-than-expected imported goods prices.

Near-term survey-based inflation expectations remain elevated. In the base case, inflation expectations are assumed to return to the 2% target relatively quickly and with a mild slowdown in the economy. This soft landing occurs because inflation expectations are assumed to be well anchored to the inflation target as they have been for many years. However, with inflation above target for more than two years and with it projected to remain close to 3% for an additional year, it is possible that inflation expectations will remain higher for longer. If that were to occur, inflationary pressures would be more persistent.
	
The outlook in the base-case scenario is the most likely outcome for inflation, and the Bank sees both upside and downside risks to this outlook. On the upside, high inflation, if left unchecked, could be more persistent than expected. As well, household spending could be stronger than projected, which would create more excess demand and increase inflationary pressures. On the downside, goods price inflation may be weaker than anticipated as global cost pressures dissipate. In addition, the global economy could face a more marked slowdown than in the base-case projection, leading to downward pressures on demand for Canadian exports and on prices for commodities and tradable goods. 

In assessing the risks, with inflation above target for two years and expected to stay close to 3% for an additional year, the Bank is concerned that progress toward price stability could stall and that inflation could rise again if there are positive surprises. 

Since reaching its peak of 8.1% in June 2022, CPI inflation has been trending downward. In the base-case outlook, inflation remains close to 3% until the middle of 2024 and then continues to slow, reaching the 2% target in the middle of 2025. 

Over the projection, inflation expectations are assumed to be well anchored to the inflation target. As a result, expectations return to target relatively quickly, as they typically have for the last 25 years. Firmly anchored inflation expectations limit the knock-on inflationary effects shocks can have, including those from the relative price shocks (i.e., higher prices for energy and tradable goods) that played an important role in the rise in inflation. As a result, when the shocks dissipate, a relatively modest amount of excess supply is needed to bring inflation back to target.  

However, with inflation above target for more than two years and with it projected to remain close to 3% over an additional year, firms and households could expect inflation to return to target more gradually. 

This possibility could already be reflected in the evolution of some key nominal measures. In Canada, three-month rates of core inflation have been stuck in the range of 3½% to 4% since September 2022. At the same time, wages have been growing at around 4% to 5% for about a year, despite the weakness in productivity growth.  
	
If firm and household inflation expectations remain elevated for longer, actual inflation would also be more persistent. This would make a timely return of inflation to target more challenging, and the output losses larger.

Another upside risk is that the outlook for household spending could be stronger than expected, leading to greater inflationary pressures. Since the beginning of the pandemic, many Canadians have accumulated a considerable amount of savings. For example, households’ bank deposits have increased by more than $330 billion, and they are still growing. The 
projection assumes that households are treating these savings as wealth. The tendency to consume from this wealth, especially for high-income households, is relatively low. However, Canadian households could spend more aggressively from their accumulated savings, as US households have done. 

Core goods price inflation has fallen significantly since the middle of 2022. It is expected to continue to ease over the projection. There is a risk, however, that the inflation of many goods prices may fall more sharply than assumed in the projection. Several input costs, including for energy and transportation, have fallen, and supply chain disruptions have been dissipating. Over time, prices may reflect these cost reversals more prominently than they have to date. 

A severe global slowdown is another key downside risk to inflation. Advanced economies continue to tighten monetary policy, and global activity could slow by more than expected. Weaker global demand could lead to softer prices for commodities and tradable goods. It is also possible that higher policy rates could interact with long-standing global financial vulnerabilities, such as elevated levels of debt, to significantly slow global growth further. Canadian economic growth and inflation would be dragged down if these risks materialized.