The economic recovery in Canada and other major economies has progressed despite recent waves of COVID-19. The recovery is expected to strengthen as the pandemic and related restrictions ease. The rollout of vaccinations is proceeding rapidly in many regions, increasing confidence in the durability of the recovery. Widespread immunity will, however, take longer to achieve in emerging-market economies (EMEs). Against this backdrop, the health and economic implications of variants are an important and growing source of uncertainty for the global economy.

After some weakness in the first quarter, the global economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic is strengthening. The recovery, however, will likely continue to be uneven across countries and sectors. In advanced economies, recoveries are on a more solid footing than they are in EMEs, reflecting elevated vaccination rates and greater policy support. Growth is particularly strong in the United States, where substantial fiscal stimulus was implemented in the first half of 2021 and the economy is more advanced in its 
reopening phase than economies of other countries.  

Demand for goods—which has bolstered manufacturing and trade—continues to support global growth. Meanwhile, the easing of containment measures in advanced economies is leading to improved spending on services. However, supply shortages and bottlenecks have contributed to rising input costs and have restrained manufacturing production in recent months.
 
After a contraction of 2.4 percent in 2020, global growth is expected to surge to about 7 percent in 2021, reflecting less drag from pandemic-related restrictions and support from both monetary and fiscal policy. 
Following the initial rebound of the economy, global growth is expected to moderate in 2022 and 2023 as effects of policy stimulus on growth fade. The outlook for global GDP growth has been revised up modestly relative to the April Report. However, the emergence of new variants of the COVID-19 virus continues to add uncertainty into the outlook.
 
Inflation has been rising in most regions and exceeded targeted rates in some countries, including the United States. Transitory factors are largely driving this increase. Surging demand amid supply constraints has pushed up some input costs. Most notably, commodity prices have increased, raising energy prices and other costs. The prices of some goods and services that fell at the beginning of the pandemic have started rising in some regions, contributing to the increase in global inflation. Nevertheless, inflation expectations remain well 
anchored in advanced economies and many EMEs. 

In advanced economies, financial conditions continue to support economic activity, and financial markets have modestly pulled forward their expectations of when monetary policy will be tightened. Yields on 10-year 
government bonds have declined by about 20 basis points since the April Report and are low by historical standards. In addition, corporate bond spreads remain tight, and equity price indexes are generally higher than at the time of the April Report. 

Financial conditions also remain accommodative in many EMEs, as indicated by narrow spreads on the emerging-market bond index. The unevenness of the recovery could, however, pose significant financial challenges to vulnerable EMEs when advanced economies begin to withdraw monetary stimulus. 

Since the April Report, higher energy prices have contributed to a modest appreciation of the Canadian dollar against most currencies other than the US dollar. The broad US dollar index also appreciated in recent weeks. 

In the United States, growth of both GDP and employment are estimated to have been strong in the first half of 2021. Industrial production remained resilient despite bottlenecks at ports and global shortages of semiconductors. The Bank estimates that GDP surpassed its pre-pandemic level in the second quarter, though about 7 million jobs remain to be recovered.

GDP growth is projected to surge to 6½ percent in 2021, supported by strong consumer spending. Substantial transfers to households have helped push consumption of goods well above pre-pandemic levels. As the economy 
reopens, consumption should shift back toward services. In addition, some of the extra savings accumulated during the pandemic are now assumed to boost consumption, starting near the end of the year. Moreover, strong 
demand should support solid growth in business investment. After growing at a robust pace through the first quarter of 2021, residential investment is expected to contract modestly mid-year. The inventory of homes to sell is limited, and high material costs are holding back new housing construction. 
   
The projection assumes approval of new government spending totalling about US$1.5 trillion over eight years starting in 2022 (Box 2). Despite these new expenditures, GDP growth is expected to slow in 2022 and 2023 as the effects of other recently adopted stimulus packages wane.

Both core and total inflation as measured by personal consumption expenditure price indexes rose above 3 percent in recent months. The increase in core inflation largely reflects a surge in demand due to strong fiscal support and supply shortages that caused temporary production shortfalls for certain goods, such as motor vehicles. The reopening of the economy also led to a recovery in prices in some hard-to-distance service sectors, where containment measures had previously led to price reductions. Rising energy prices also boosted total inflation. Inflation is expected to decrease over the next year as the effects of these factors dissipate, but it is forecast to remain above 2 percent over the projection horizon.

GDP growth is estimated to have turned positive in the euro area in the second quarter as businesses started to reopen. Growth is expected to accelerate further in the second half of the year and to remain strong in 2022 
with the broadening of the reopening phase. Growth should slow in 2023 as the effects of fiscal stimulus begin to fade. 

Total inflation in the euro area has increased in recent months, due largely to transitory factors, and is expected to peak in the second half of 2021. Core inflation, however, remains below target as the euro area continues to operate well below its capacity. Over the projection horizon, core inflation should gradually increase as economic activity recovers.

Growth in China slowed in the first quarter in response to COVID-19 containment measures. Manufacturing production and exports continue to underpin economic activity. Household spending and growth in services remain modest. Policy is adjusting as conditions evolve. Ongoing vaccinations should facilitate a gradual increase in demand for services over the remainder of the year. As conditions improve, policy support is expected to be gradually withdrawn, leading to slowing growth over the projection horizon. While producer prices for some goods have risen sharply, consumer price inflation remains low.
	
The emergence of new variants of the COVID-19 virus has led to new outbreaks and high daily case numbers in many oil-importing EMEs since March. This prompted new restrictions that likely impeded growth in the second quarter, particularly in India. As case numbers fall and restrictions are eased, a recovery is expected in the second half of the year, though the spread of new variants is a risk. Growth is then projected to slow in 
2022 and 2023, when the initial rebound effects will have faded. The slow vaccination rollout is nevertheless expected to restrain the recovery through 2023, given the elevated risks of additional outbreaks and renewed 
restrictions. 

In the rest-of-world group, growth is projected to be strong, reflecting robust vaccination rollouts—particularly in the advanced economies—and the associated easing of restrictions on mobility. The increase in oil prices since the start of the year has also supported economic activity in the oil-exporting members of this group.

Demand for oil has outpaced supply in recent months, pushing oil inventories down to typical pre-pandemic levels. The prices of Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canadian Select oil have risen and are assumed to be US$75, US$70 and US$60, respectively, each US$10 higher than in the April Report.

The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) and some non-OPEC oil producers (OPEC+) expanded production modestly from May to July. The group has discussed further quota increases but has not yet reached an agreement. Even with some expansion of OPEC+ production, the ongoing reopening of major economies could lift prices above assumed levels in the near term. Subsequently, a large rise in OPEC+ production or a greater-than-expected increase in US production could more than reverse such gains.  

The Bank’s non-energy commodity price index is close to its level at the time of the April Report and higher than it was before the pandemic. Prices for base metals and agricultural products have moved up modestly since the April Report. While lumber prices increased sharply between late April and mid-May, they have since returned to below their level at the time of the April Report because housing-related pressures eased. Markets expect non-energy commodity prices to remain elevated over the projection horizon due to strong global demand. 
	
In Canada, the rapid rollout of vaccinations is improving prospects for a sustainable recovery. The third wave of COVID-19 slowed economic growth and led to reductions in employment in April and May 2021. However, these 
negative effects are waning, and the downside risks associated with the pandemic have significantly diminished. Broader immunity, fewer COVID-19 cases and the resulting easing of restrictions are expected to lead to a strong pickup in GDP growth over the second half of 2021.

Achieving a full and inclusive economic recovery will, however, take time. Hard-to-distance service sectors face an uncertain reopening process. They may encounter difficulties rehiring workers quickly as well as supply chain issues. And they may experience uncertainty about the strength of demand as well as concerns about the possibility of future restrictions. Over the coming months, the labour market should continue to see a strong rebound in employment. However, the process of matching workers and jobs could be challenging and cause delays. As well, structural changes to the economy may mean that some people face long spells of unemployment.

While this adjustment process could be lengthy and uneven, broader COVID-19 immunity should reduce uncertainty and cautiousness. In turn, this will boost consumption and business investment. Similar developments in our 
trading partners’ economies should underpin the recovery in exports. While fiscal and monetary policies are supporting economic activity, the recovery is expected to become broader and more self-sustaining over time.

Economic activity in the first half of 2021 has been somewhat less robust than anticipated because a combination of softer housing activity, supply chain issues and the impact of containment weighed more on growth than expected. However, throughout the rest of the projection horizon, economic growth is expected to be stronger than noted in the April Report. The economy is projected to grow at a robust pace of around 6 percent in 2021. Growth then moderates to about 4½ and 3¼ percent—still solid paces—in 2022 and 2023, respectively.

Many sources of uncertainty surround the medium-term outlook for GDP and potential output. These include the difficult adjustments in the labour market, the productivity benefits of digital investments and the persistence of changes in consumer behaviour. Because these factors are relevant for both demand and supply, estimates of when the output gap will close are particularly uncertain.

CPI inflation will likely remain at or above 3 percent through the rest of 2021 due to temporary factors related to the pandemic. As the effects of these factors dissipate later this year and in 2022, inflation is expected to ease to about 2 percent. Inflation is then projected to rise temporarily—to modestly above 2 percent in 2023—before returning toward target in 2024.
	
Economic growth should pick up strongly in the third quarter of 2021. Consumer confidence has returned to pre-pandemic levels, and a high share of the eligible population is vaccinated. As the economy reopens, consumption is expected to lead the rebound with an increase in spending on services such as transportation, recreation, and food and accommodation.

Housing resales have moderated from historically high levels but remain elevated. Other areas of housing activity—such as new construction and renovation—remain strong, supported by high disposable incomes, low 
borrowing rates and the pandemic-related desire for more living space.

Strong growth in foreign demand and higher commodity prices should contribute to a solid pickup in exports and business investment. Broad-based improvements in business confidence should also provide support. The adverse effects of the global shortage of semiconductors on motor vehicle exports are expected to ease over the second half of this year. However, supply chain disruptions and shipping issues are assumed to weigh on exports more broadly into 2022.

Despite a sizable recuperation of jobs in June, the employment rate remains 1.7 percentage points below where it was in February 2020. Given population growth, roughly 550,000 people would need to be hired just to reach the pre-pandemic employment rate. Moreover, the total amount of hours worked in June was roughly 4 percent below the pre-pandemic level. Job gains in June were particularly strong for women and young people. Nevertheless, for some groups of workers, employment rates are still much lower than their pre-pandemic levels. In particular, employment of low-wage workers is far from fully recovered. 

The share of those unemployed for 52 weeks or longer is at the highest level since the series began. In the past, lengthier spells of unemployment increased the risk that workers would leave the labour force or see their skills erode. However, the uniqueness of the pandemic may mean that the length of time unemployed is a less reliable indicator of scarring risks. The workers most affected by the pandemic—namely, young people and workers with fewer skills—may face less risk of skills erosion. In addition, young people may be able to adjust more easily by obtaining further education or training.

Large increases in jobs are expected to continue over the summer months. This should help further reduce employment gaps across job types and worker groups. However, it could take businesses some time to find workers with the right skills to fill jobs. In addition, firms with large hiring needs may have trouble bringing new workers on board quickly. Meanwhile, many workers may face challenges shifting to growing sectors and retraining to acquire new skills.

Indicators from the summer 2021 Business Outlook Survey continue to suggest that slack is uneven across sectors. Businesses facing strong demand, such as those tied to consumer goods, housing or e-commerce, frequently point to tighter labour market conditions.

Measures of wage inflation remain subdued. Swings in the number of workers in low-paying jobs during the pandemic have been making these measures volatile. Variable-weight measures have fluctuated the most, with 
high rates of wage growth when employment in low-wage jobs dropped. Wage measures that are less influenced by such composition effects, including fixed-weight measures, have been more stable.

For the economy as a whole, excess supply remains prevalent. The Bank estimates that the output gap was between -3.0 and -2.0 percent in the second quarter. A range for the output gap of one percentage point 
has been reported in the Monetary Policy Report for some time. This range may understate overall uncertainty surrounding the output gap, and this is particularly true now because of the exceptional circumstances of the 
pandemic.

CPI inflation has increased in recent months and is expected to remain at or above 3 percent for the remainder of 2021. Three sets of factors are leading to this temporary strength. First, gasoline prices have risen from 
very low levels a year ago and are above their pre-pandemic levels, lifting inflation. Second, other prices that had fallen last year with plummeting demand are now recovering with the reopening of the economy and the 
release of pent-up demand. Third, supply constraints, including shipping bottlenecks and the global shortage of semiconductors, are pushing up the prices of goods such as motor vehicles.

Core measures of inflation have picked up in recent months, likely reflecting some of the same temporary issues driving movements in CPI inflation. CPI-common remains below 2 percent, while CPI-median and CPI-trim have moved above 2 percent. Despite recent increases in inflation, long-term inflation expectations have remained stable.

Following a strong recovery led by household spending in 2021, economic growth is projected to ease over 2022 and 2023 while remaining higher than potential output growth. In the projection, the output gap closes and labour market slack is absorbed in the second half of 2022. This forecast is sensitive to the uncertain evolution of demand and difficulties related to supply, including those associated with reopening as well as with long-term structural adjustments.

The recovery in demand is expected to become more broad-based and self-sustaining over time. The level of residential investment is anticipated to decline from historical highs, and the growth of government spending should slow. Meanwhile, business investment and export growth will likely pick up. Robust business investment and higher immigration should help strengthen potential output growth over the projection horizon.

With households expected to be less cautious and assumed to spend 20 percent of the extra savings they accumulated during the pandemic, consumption growth is projected to be strong. As the labour market recovers, growth in labour income should pick up even as government transfers gradually decline.

A degree of cautiousness is nonetheless anticipated to persist. Some consumers may be slower to resume normal activities because of lingering fears of contracting COVID-19. Other households, particularly those with low 
incomes, are expected to hold extra savings because of economic concerns.
 
Housing activity is anticipated to remain higher than it was before the pandemic even as it declines from its recent record-high levels. The recovery in employment, increasing population growth and elevated savings support the projection for housing demand. The boost from the pandemic-induced increase in demand for larger homes should ease gradually over the projection horizon.

Strong housing demand amid limited supply has contributed to rising house prices over the past year. However, a rebalancing of supply and demand is expected to lead to a moderation in house price growth over the projection horizon. As the recovery progresses, new construction will add to the supply of houses, particularly in high-demand areas outside of city centres. And with high vaccination rates, households may be more comfortable showing their homes to potential buyers. The resulting increases in supply, along with some softening of demand, should improve the balance in housing markets.

The strong US recovery is expected to support robust export growth over the projection horizon. The growth of goods exports should benefit from strengthening foreign demand and higher prices for a wide range of commodities. However, motor vehicle exports will likely remain below pre-pandemic levels as some manufacturers adjust their production in response to changes in US consumer preferences and the industry movement toward 
producing more electric and hybrid vehicles.

Services exports should rebound from weak levels as travel restrictions are gradually lifted. A full recovery will take time given weakness in components such as business travel.

The relatively high level of oil prices is expected to support growth in energy exports over the projection horizon. Existing pipeline and rail transportation capacity, as well as forthcoming pipeline expansions, should provide sufficient capacity for export volumes to expand over the next few years.

Imports are projected to grow in line with strong domestic demand. Retailers should contribute to the strength of imports in upcoming quarters as they replenish their inventories. The relatively high level of the Canadian dollar makes imports more affordable and Canadian products less competitive in both domestic and export markets.

As domestic and foreign demand increase and business confidence improves, investment outside the oil and gas sector is expected to pick up in 2021. It should keep strengthening over 2022 and 2023. The summer 2021 Business Outlook Survey revealed broad-based strength in investment intentions. Moreover, widespread adoption of digitalization and information technologies—often accelerated in response to the pandemic—should continue to boost hiring and investment. While increased remote work and online shopping are reducing demand for office and retail space, the trend toward e-commerce should strengthen investment in logistics and warehouses. Measures in the latest federal budget should further boost public and private investment.
 
Investment in the oil and gas sector is expected to remain below its pre-pandemic level throughout the projection horizon. Capital spending plans are relatively modest despite the recent rise in prices for oil and natural gas. Businesses may be hesitant to increase investment in an environment where long-term transportation capacity is uncertain and may be limited. Moreover, the desire to reduce leverage, uncertainty about future demand for oil and a heightened focus on climate change will continue to challenge the sector.

Inventory investment is projected to rise and contribute to real GDP growth throughout the projection as businesses rebuild their low inventories after unprecedented drawdowns in 2020.

Over 2020 and 2021, inflation dynamics are heavily influenced by imbalances in supply and demand across certain goods and hard-to-distance services. Because reopening and structural change are complex processes, the implications for imbalances between supply and demand are hard to predict.

CPI inflation is expected to ease by the start of 2022 as the temporary factors related to the pandemic fade. Economic slack becomes the primary factor influencing the projection for inflation dynamics thereafter.

The uncertainty around the outlook for the output gap and inflation remains high. Because of this, the estimated timing for when slack is absorbed is highly imprecise. In the projection, this occurs sometime in the second half of 2022.

After declining to 2 percent during 2022, inflation is expected to rise modestly in 2023 as the economy moves into excess demand. The excess demand and resultant increase in inflation to above target are expected to be 
temporary. They are a consequence of Governing Council’s commitment to keep the policy interest rate at the effective lower bound until economic slack is absorbed so that the 2 percent inflation target is sustainably achieved. Inflation is expected to return toward the target in 2024.

The projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well-anchored at the 2 percent target. Both businesses and consumers view price pressures as elevated in the near term. A large majority of respondents to the summer 2021 Business Outlook Survey now expect inflation to be above 2 percent on average over the next two years. Nonetheless, firms view higher commodity prices, supply chain bottlenecks, policy stimulus and the release of pent-up demand as largely temporary factors boosting inflation higher in the near term. 

The Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations for the second quarter of 2021 reported that short-term inflation expectations have risen as well, in line with recent increases in prices. However, respondents’ long-term inflation expectations have not increased. The April 2021 Consensus Economics forecast for long-term inflation expectations shows an average of 2 percent through 2031. In addition, the 10-year Canadian break-even inflation rate, which provides a signal about the expected long-term path of inflation, has remained close to 2 percent in recent months.

Several of the balance sheet tools used by the Bank at the onset of the pandemic to support market liquidity were wound down or allowed to expire on schedule once market functioning had improved. The remaining liquidity support and market functioning programs have ended since the April Report. However, the Government of Canada Bond Purchase Program (GBPP)—the Bank’s quantitative easing (QE) program—continues to provide monetary policy stimulus to support the economic recovery. In April 2021, given the progress of the recovery, the Bank adjusted the pace of weekly GBPP purchases from a minimum of $4 billion to a target of $3 billion.

The GBPP targets a weekly value of gross bond purchases. The target does not vary with the value of bonds maturing in any given week. To date, around $18 billion of Government of Canada (GoC) bonds purchased under the QE program have matured and rolled off the Bank’s balance sheet. Because the value of maturities has been relatively low so far, the average difference between total weekly purchases (i.e., gross purchases) and weekly purchases minus maturities (i.e., net purchases) has been small. But the value of maturing bonds will pick up. This is important to note because the GBPP adds monetary policy stimulus through its net purchases.

In this context, the composition and size of the Bank’s balance sheet have continued to evolve. The total stock of GoC bonds on the Bank’s balance sheet is around $400 billion, or more than 80 percent of total assets.8 The Bank’s total ownership of GoC bonds outstanding has increased to 44 percent of the overall amount outstanding, from 42 percent in April. However, the impact of this increase on the size of the balance sheet was more than offset by the maturing of a sizable amount of shorter-term assets—notably extended term repurchase agreements. After peaking at $575 billion in mid-March 2021, the value of total assets has decreased to just under $485 billion. As the total value of assets declined, so did the level of settlement balances, which now sits at roughly $260 billion.

Uncertainty around the projection remains unusually high. The outlook still depends on the evolution of the pandemic, including the spread of COVID-19 variants. However, in Canada, downside tail risks have diminished with high rates of vaccination. The reopening of the economy will be a complex process, and the responses of consumers to new spending options will be difficult to predict. As a result, the size and persistence of any imbalances between supply and demand as well as the effects of these imbalances on inflation are particularly uncertain.

Some of the risks identified in previous reports have been partially incorporated into the projection. The base-case scenario now includes additional US fiscal stimulus, more robust consumption in Canada and other 
advanced economies, stronger potential output in Canada and greater cost pressures.

The outlook for inflation remains subject to several upside and downside risks. Drawing from a larger set of risks that were considered, this section presents a selection of risks identified as the most important ones for the projected path of inflation. The Bank views these risks as roughly balanced.

The base-case projection assumes continued low-level transmission of the virus along with possible flare-ups. However, the spread of more contagious variants could trigger a stronger resurgence of infections. This in turn could lead to the reimposition of containment measures, dampen consumer and business confidence, and delay the rebound in hard-to-distance service sectors.

Progress in vaccinations and reduced pandemic-related uncertainty could boost confidence by more than expected. As a result, households could spend more of their accumulated savings or increase their spending faster than assumed in the base-case projection. Consumption and residential investment would then be stronger than projected and contribute to greater inflationary pressures.

Businesses are facing higher costs for shipping and for inputs affected by delivery delays, as well as higher commodity prices. Disruptions to business operations brought about by the pandemic could also increase costs, as could adjustments during the reopening of the economy. The potential impacts on inflation are highly uncertain. 
	
Some goods that were highly sought after during the pandemic could see a softening in demand, leading to a better balance with supply over time. Some services meanwhile may face a burst of pent-up demand that could increase imbalances if the return of supply is slow while firms rehire and bring back capacity. In an environment of strong demand, businesses could find that they are able to raise prices. While estimates of these effects have been incorporated into the inflation projection, the effects could be stronger or more persistent than estimated.

Canadian exports could be weaker than in the base-case projection. This could be the case if the consequences of supply disruptions that constrain exports or competitiveness challenges associated with a strong Canadian dollar are greater than in the base case. At the same time, new tariffs or Buy American provisions could mute the benefit to Canadian exporters of strong US demand.

The base-case projection includes a gradual moderation in housing market activity. There is a risk that adjustment could be faster or more pronounced. Strong housing demand in some regions has been motivated in part by preferences to live in larger homes and to move out of cities. However, preferences could shift again as the pandemic’s effects wane, especially if employers expect their employees to return to the office. A rapid adjustment in the housing market could also have adverse effects on consumption, and these could be made even worse if house prices were to decline. 

Financial vulnerabilities remain important in many countries because of elevated debt levels and asset prices. If the global recovery were to stall, there could be a sharp pullback in risk appetite, constraining access to credit for higher-risk borrowers. Alternatively, if inflation were to be persistently higher, policy rates could rise faster than markets currently expect, and financial conditions could tighten. Either of these scenarios could trigger financial stress for vulnerable EMEs or other highly indebted borrowers, dampening global demand. 
