Confidence in the economic recovery in Canada and other major economies has improved. However, COVID-19 variants are leading to renewed lockdowns in many countries, dampening near-term activity.

Economic activity in recent months has been more resilient than anticipated, with consumers and businesses learning new ways to adapt to public health measures. The rollout of COVID-19 vaccines is also progressing faster in some jurisdictions than previously expected. Governments, most importantly in the United States, have announced new fiscal stimulus. Overall, the outlook has been revised up for the Canadian and global economies.

Achieving full recovery will take time, and the impacts of the pandemic remain uneven. As well, uncertainty remains elevated, particularly around the implications of variants of the virus. In this context, fiscal and monetary policy are providing important support to economic activity in Canada and globally.

The global economy has been more resilient to the pandemic than previously assessed, and the global outlook is revised up from the January Report. Global economic activity is set to ramp up in mid-2021, as policy support and the expansion of vaccination programs enable stronger growth, notably in service sectors. Currently, however, the spread of new COVID-19 variants and the renewal of lockdowns, together with challenges to supply chains, are weighing on activity in many economies.

The pace of the economic recovery varies considerably across countries. In the United States, exceptionally large, front-loaded fiscal stimulus and rapid vaccination rollouts are expected to lift growth to 7 percent in 2021. In most other regions, recovery is slower than in the United States. Overall, the Bank projects global growth in gross domestic product (GDP) to surge to 6.8 percent in 2021, after contracting by 2.4 percent in 2020. The projected rate of global growth then moderates to about 4 percent in 2022, as the rebound in activity eases and the effects of fiscal stimulus fade.

The global recovery has sparked an increase in commodity prices. Recent increases in energy prices are raising inflation in several countries. Base-year effects are also expected to boost inflation in the coming months. These effects are caused by sharp declines in some prices a year ago. US inflation is anticipated to average more than 2 percent over the projection horizon as a result of these transitory factors as well as inflationary pressures arising from the rapid US recovery.

Stronger global demand prospects, together with supply restraints, have driven oil prices considerably higher since the January Report. The prices of Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canadian Select oil are US$10 to US$15 higher than assumed in January.

The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries plus several other major oil-exporting countries (OPEC+) extended most of their previous production cuts through April and agreed to gradually increase output starting in May. Supply increases by US producers have been limited, despite the rise in oil prices in recent months. Levels of spare capacity remain very high.
 
In the near term, risks to the assumption of flat oil prices are mostly to the upside since the demand for oil could rise faster than the supply as global growth picks up. Over the projection horizon, however, this risk is roughly balanced by the risk that a rapid return of previously idled capacity to production could reduce oil prices.

The Bank’s non-energy commodity price index has risen 11 percent since the January Report. Strong housing demand in North America has pushed already-elevated lumber prices up about 35 percent—to record highs. Base metals have seen a 7 percent increase, partly reflecting prospects for higher global growth.

Nominal yields on benchmark US 10-year bonds have risen about 50 basis points since the January Report. Market-based measures of US inflation expectations have been rising for several months. Since January, US real yields have moved up in response to improved growth prospects, and they account for over one-half of the total increase in the US 10-year yield. 
However, real 10-year yields still remain negative and close to historical lows. Sovereign bond yields for other economies, including Canada, have also increased since the January Report, as financial markets responded to improved growth prospects.

Risk appetite has remained relatively robust, contributing to accommodative financial conditions. Equity price indexes in most advanced economies have increased since January and remain near recent highs. Corporate credit spreads have narrowed considerably since the onset of the pandemic and, as in January, are close to their pre-pandemic levels. Some emerging-market economies (EMEs), however, have faced tighter financial conditions in recent months.

The US dollar has strengthened against the currencies of most US trading partners since the January Report, and the Canadian dollar has appreciated by about 1 percent against the US dollar. Higher oil and other commodity prices have contributed to the recent rise in the Canadian dollar.

The US$900 billion fiscal package announced by the United States in December last year boosted incomes and consumption in early 2021. The US$1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan (ARP) approved in March provides substantial additional fiscal support, primarily through 
government spending and transfers to households. Now that most cheques have already been sent out, the Bank expects US growth could reach about 10 percent annualized in the second quarter. 

Progress on COVID-19 vaccinations is leading to the easing of containment measures, boosting confidence and supporting growth. The rapid vaccination rollout is also expected to help limit the scarring effects on the level of potential GDP.

Overall, the Bank projects US GDP to grow by 7 percent in 2021. Consumption—including demand for high-contact services—is driving most of the growth as the economy reopens and fiscal transfers continue to provide income support. Robust demand, ARP stimulus and low interest 
rates are also expected to boost growth in business and housing investment. These components are important sources of demand for Canadian exports. In 2022, US GDP growth moderates to about 4 percent as the effects of fiscal policy fade. Since fiscal policy is front loaded, its contribution to GDP growth is negative in 2023, and growth slows to 1.3 percent.

US personal consumption expenditure inflation is expected to rise to close to 3 percent in the near term, reflecting increases in energy prices, health care fees, shelter costs and base-year effects. Rapid output growth is expected to absorb slack and create excess demand. This will keep inflation somewhat above 2 percent through 2023, consistent with the US Federal Reserve’s average inflation targeting strategy.

The spread of new COVID-19 variants in the euro area has led to additional lockdowns and has likely contributed to negative GDP growth in the first quarter. Disruptions from semiconductor shortages may also constrain near-term activity. In response to these developments, several governments have provided further fiscal support. Growth is projected to pick up in mid-2021, as COVID-19 vaccinations roll out, lockdowns ease and policy support 
continues. Fiscal stimulus starts to wind down in 2022, creating a drag on growth. Currently, base-year effects and other factors are temporarily boosting inflation in the euro area. Persistent economic slack and subdued inflation expectations, however, are expected to keep inflation below 1.5 percent over the medium term.

After strong growth in late 2020, economic activity in China slowed in early 2021, due partly to renewed pandemic containment measures in some areas. Chinese exports continue to benefit from strong global demand for goods, although domestic consumption growth remains moderate. Broadening COVID-19 immunity should provide some support to growth in 2021. But the impact will likely be muted compared with other regions, since the virus is already well controlled and activity is less restrained in China. Policy support is expected to be withdrawn gradually. The Bank projects China’s economy to grow by 91/2 percent in 2021 and then to expand roughly in line with the Bank’s estimate of Chinese potential output growth in 2022 and 2023.

The oil-importing EME group experienced robust, double-digit growth at the end of 2020. Growth is moderating in early 2021 as several EMEs require renewed restrictions to slow rapidly spreading COVID‑19 variants. Some EMEs have recently tightened monetary policy because their depreciating currencies were contributing to rising inflation. Growth for the EME group is projected to slow in 2022 and 2023 when initial rebound effects will have faded. Slow vaccination rollouts are expected to restrain the recovery through 2023.

In the rest-of-the-world group, activity has been quite resilient despite some recent pandemic-related lockdowns. GDP growth is forecast to pick up in mid-2021 as economies reopen and recent increases in oil prices provide a tailwind to growth for oil exporters. Growth is anticipated to slow in 2022 and 2023 as activity normalizes and policy support recedes. 
	
The Canadian economy continues to recover from the pandemic’s devastating effects. Economic activity proved much more resilient during the second wave, reflecting the ability of consumers to adapt and ingenuity on the part of businesses to function under restrictions. As a result, growth is estimated to be significantly higher in the first quarter of 2021 than anticipated in the January Report.

Even as new containment restrictions will restrain growth in the near term, the rollout of vaccines, fiscal and monetary policy support, strong foreign demand and higher commodity prices should contribute to robust growth in 2021. Nevertheless, considerable uncertainty remains concerning the evolution of the pandemic, particularly given the rapid spread of more contagious variants of the virus.

Achieving full recovery will take time. Strong and sustained growth is needed to overcome the pandemic’s severe economic impacts. A significant amount of economic slack remains in high-contact service sectors, where workers and businesses have suffered the most. Moreover, the situations in these sectors will worsen before they get better because many provinces are seeing rising infection rates and are tightening public health restrictions.
 
Over the medium term, consumption should recover strongly when restrictions ease and jobs are recouped. Progress toward broad immunity, domestically and globally, will also help reduce uncertainty and improve household and business confidence. This in turn will support business investment and exports. As a result, the recovery is expected to become more broad-based. 

Overall, the outlook is stronger than in the January Report. Economic activity is now forecast to grow at a robust pace of around 6½ percent in 2021. GDP growth is projected to then moderate to around 3¾ percent in 2022 and around 3¼ percent in 2023.

Considerable uncertainty surrounds the medium-term outlook for GDP and potential output. Many issues remain unclear, including the persistence of changes in consumer preferences, the extent of labour market scarring, the implications of weak investment early in the pandemic and the productivity benefits of faster deployment of new digital technologies. Because these factors tend to affect both demand and supply, estimates of when the output gap will close are particularly uncertain.

Economic slack and gasoline price dynamics are the main factors influencing consumer price index (CPI) inflation. Over the course of 2021, upward pressure on inflation coming in large part from higher gasoline prices is expected to temporarily outweigh downward pressure from economic slack. Subsequently, inflation is anticipated to be around 2 percent.

Economic activity is expected to grow by about 5¼ percent on average over the first half of 2021, following a stronger-than-anticipated growth rate of 9.6 percent in the fourth quarter of 2020. While overall growth is robust, activity in the hardest-hit sectors remains weak in the near term due to the latest wave of the virus and related containment measures.

Housing construction and resales have reached record-high levels, supported by relatively high disposable incomes and low borrowing rates. The pandemic has also shifted household preferences toward larger homes and locations outside of city centres. The strong demand fundamentals amid relatively limited supply continue to fuel strong house price growth.

Consumer spending is estimated to have remained flat in the first quarter and is expected to increase only modestly in the second quarter. Confidence is anticipated to improve further as vaccinations roll out and restrictions are eased. However, robust consumption growth is not expected until the third quarter.

Strengthening foreign demand and rising commodity prices have boosted prospects for growth in exports and business investment in the first half of 2021. As well, business confidence has been improving, and business financing conditions remain favourable. However, motor vehicle 
exports will temporarily contract significantly due to the global shortage of semiconductors.
 
The labour market remains difficult for many Canadians. Strong job gains in February and March 2021 followed large losses in previous months, with the swings driven mostly by changes in pandemic-related restrictions. The tightening of containment measures in April is expected to lead to another wave of job losses, mostly in low-wage and part-time work, before employment rebounds later in the second quarter.

Unemployment remains highest in sectors such as accommodation and food services and retail. Low-wage workers, women and young people continue to be the most affected. The latest spike in COVID‑19 cases will likely delay the recovery in high-contact sectors, prolonging unevenness in the labour market recovery.

Roughly 300,000 additional people would need to be hired just to reach the pre-pandemic employment level.1 However, given population growth, to return the employment rate to where it was before the pandemic, the increase in jobs would actually need to be larger—roughly 475,000. Meanwhile, the unemployment rate has declined from its peak of 13.7 percent 
in May 2020 to 7.5 percent in March 2021. Despite this improvement, the share of unemployed people who have been without a job for 27 weeks or more remains elevated, at about 30 percent. This is particularly concerning because long periods of unemployment have been associated with skill erosion and lower attachment to the labour market.

Indicators from the spring 2021 Business Outlook Survey provide evidence of unevenness in economic slack across sectors. Businesses facing stronger demand commonly reported capacity pressures. However, survey responses point to continued weakness in sectors such as accommodation, food and recreational services.

Looking at the economy as a whole, despite the strong estimated growth in the first quarter of 2021, considerable excess supply still exists. The Bank estimates that the output gap narrowed to between -3.0 percent and -2.0 percent in the first quarter. Uncertainty around this range remains elevated.

Over the next few months, inflation is expected to rise temporarily to around the top of the 1 to 3 percent inflation-control target range. The transitory increase reflects the fact that the prices of some goods and services fell sharply with the sudden drop in demand at the onset of the pandemic. This results in base-year effects—CPI inflation appears higher on a year-over-year basis because prices of gasoline, motor vehicles and traveller accommodations fell in early 2020. In addition, the increase in oil prices since December has driven gasoline prices above their pre-pandemic levels. In setting monetary policy, the Bank looks through such temporary movements in inflation.

Measures of core inflation have remained at or below 2 percent and have diverged since the first wave. Two measures—CPI-median and CPI-trim—likely overstate underlying inflation given the unusual price movements that have occurred since the start of the pandemic.

In this Report, the Bank has returned to the usual timing of its annual assessment of potential output. The profile for potential output is stronger than in the October 2020 Report, reflecting the improved outlook and the greater-than-expected resilience of economic activity. Despite this positive reassessment, potential output remains below levels estimated before the pandemic.

Potential output growth is projected to pick up over the projection horizon. The continued robust recovery in investment should strengthen trend labour productivity growth. Meanwhile, trend labour input growth is anticipated to be roughly flat, with population aging and labour market scarring offsetting gains from immigration.

The pandemic and related structural changes are expected to have lasting effects on potential output and GDP. These changes include more investment in digitalization, as reported in the spring 2021 Business Outlook Survey, as well as the shift toward remote work and online shopping. 
 
The effects of such changes and their persistence cannot be estimated with precision. The strong 4 percent year-over-year growth in labour productivity in the fourth quarter of 2020 could, in part, indicate true and persistent labour productivity gains resulting from businesses adopting new technologies or improving their ways of doing business. However, because job losses were concentrated in low-wage, low-productivity positions, a compositional effect has temporarily boosted reported productivity growth.

Following a strong consumption-led recovery in 2021, growth is projected to ease over 2022 and 2023 and become increasingly broad-based and self-sustaining. In the Bank’s forecast, economic activity is supported by strong foreign demand, the relatively high level of commodity prices, the recovery in confidence, and fiscal and monetary policy.

The timing of the recovery differs across components of demand. Housing and government spending have already surpassed their pre-pandemic levels, and growth in these components is anticipated to slow. In contrast, consumption, investment and exports have yet to reach their pre-pandemic levels and are expected to first strengthen before their growth rates moderate later in the projection horizon.

Consumption is anticipated to rebound in the second half of 2021 when spending on high-contact services increases. Growth of consumer expenditures is expected to remain strong over the projection horizon. Projected spending is supported by improved confidence, relatively high disposable income and low interest rates. As labour income and employment continue to recover, government transfers will become a decreasingly important source of support to disposable income.

On average, Canadian households have accumulated significantly more savings during the pandemic than usual. The Bank continues to assume that households will choose not to spend these savings on goods and services but instead use them to pay down debt, buy homes or invest. In addition, a heightened demand for precautionary savings is assumed to persist for some time. The savings rate is therefore expected to decline gradually and stay somewhat above its pre-pandemic level until the end of the projection horizon. A stronger rebound in consumer spending and a lower savings rate represent an upside risk to the outlook. Prolonged labour market adjustment may contribute to cautiousness on the part of some consumers, including a demand for precautionary savings. It may take a long time for some businesses in severely affected sectors to recover and rehire workers. Moreover, employment in some sectors may never return to pre-pandemic levels, meaning workers may need to find jobs in other sectors—a process that could take some time and require retraining.

Housing activity is expected to soften but remain well above pre-pandemic levels over the projection horizon. The preference for larger homes will likely remain a factor affecting the housing market after the pandemic given the expected permanent rise in remote work. In addition, higher levels of immigration are expected to contribute to strong population growth later in the projection horizon. These sources of demand should support elevated levels of new home construction and renovation spending. Housing resales are projected to soften from very high levels. This is partly because some homebuyers may have moved their purchases forward to lock in low mortgage rates, especially given expectations of rising prices.

A strong US recovery is projected to support robust export growth. Goods exports are expected to strengthen because of improving global demand and higher prices for a wide range of commodities. These positive effects are likely to substantially exceed the adverse impacts of the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar. The healthy rebound in US industrial 
production should boost demand for Canadian exports of machinery and equipment and non-energy commodities. Meanwhile, motor vehicle exports will likely remain below pre-pandemic levels, mostly due to scheduled reductions in production mandates. 

Services exports should rebound from weak levels as travel restrictions are eased. However, evidence from surveys suggests the recovery will be drawn out for some services, such as business travel. Businesses may reduce travel budgets in favour of more teleconferencing and a smaller carbon footprint.

Current levels of oil prices and solid US refinery demand for Canadian crude oil should support moderate growth in energy exports. Crude-by-rail exports are expected to become more prevalent in the near term until additional pipeline capacity comes online at the end of 2021.

Imports are projected to grow in line with strong domestic demand.

Investment growth outside the oil and gas sector is expected to pick up in 2021 as domestic and foreign demand increase and capacity pressures mount. The spring 2021 Business Outlook Survey revealed that one-quarter of firms are resuming or catching up with their investment plans, including spending on automation and digitalization. The accelerated trend toward e-commerce is expected to support stronger investment in machinery and equipment as well as in warehouses and related structures.

The recovery in business investment will likely be uneven, however. Increased remote work and online shopping may lead to reduced demand for office and retail space.

Investment growth in the oil and gas sector is expected to pick up, reflecting the recent rise in oil and natural gas prices. At current prices, most existing oil projects can cover businesses’ operational and transportation expenses. However, the desire to reduce leverage, uncertainty about future prices and a heightened focus on climate change will continue to challenge the sector. As a result, investment in the sector is expected to remain below its pre-pandemic level throughout the projection horizon.

Inventory investment is projected to rise and contribute about 1 percentage point to real GDP growth in 2021. Businesses are anticipated to continue rebuilding their low retail inventories after unprecedented drawdowns in 2020.
 
After rising to around 3 percent—the top of the inflation-control range—CPI inflation is expected to decline toward 2 percent over the second half of 2021. This easing largely reflects diminishing base-year effects from gasoline prices.

Inflation is projected to decline further in the first half of 2022. This reflects commodity prices no longer being a source of upward pressures, while economic slack continues to be a drag on inflation. Although the timing is highly uncertain, inflation is expected to be at around 2 percent in the second half of 2022, as economic slack is absorbed.

The uncertainty around the inflation outlook is greater than usual. This partly reflects the different impacts the virus and lockdowns have had on sectors, businesses and groups of workers, creating an unusual degree of uncertainty about the amount of slack in the economy. As discussed earlier, estimates of when the output gap will close are highly uncertain. As well, the concentration of job losses in sectors where job reallocation prospects are typically weak may imply that labour market slack will be absorbed more slowly than usual, possibly putting ongoing downward pressure on inflation.

This projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored at the 2 percent target. Most firms that participated in the spring 2021 Business Outlook Survey expect that inflation over the next two years will remain within the Bank’s inflation-control target range of 1 to 3 percent. More respondents than in the previous survey expect inflation to be in the upper half of that range. Firms’ views reflect 
strong anticipated demand related to fiscal and monetary policy support and the future easing of restrictions. As in recent years, most respondents to the Canadian Survey of Consumer Expectations in the first quarter of 2021 anticipate that inflation will be within or slightly above the 1 to 3 percent target range over the next two years. The January 2021 Consensus Economics forecast for long-term inflation expectations shows an average of 2 percent through 2031.

Since March 2020, the Bank has used balance sheet tools to provide extraordinary liquidity support and monetary stimulus to the Canadian economy. In the early stages of the pandemic, programs and facilities were focused on restoring market functioning and bolstering funding liquidity to keep credit flowing. Initially, purchases of Government of Canada (GoC) bonds through the Government Bond Purchase Program aimed to ease strains in the GoC bond market. These purchases also enhanced the effectiveness of other policy actions.

As liquidity conditions in the GoC bond market improved, the primary objective of bond purchases shifted toward a focus on monetary stimulus. The cumulative stock, the flow and the composition of quantitative easing (QE) purchases continue to put downward pressure on borrowing rates, supporting economic activity. QE also reinforces monetary stimulus provided 
by the Bank’s forward guidance. This guidance has committed to holding the policy interest rate at the effective lower bound until economic slack is absorbed, so the inflation target is sustainably achieved.

The evolution in the size and composition of the Bank’s balance sheet reflects the transition between these two objectives—market functioning and monetary stimulus—of the GoC bond purchase program. The liquidity and other asset purchase programs were successful in restoring well-functioning markets and have been gradually wound down since October. As a result, by the end of April, the value of total assets on the Bank’s balance sheet is expected to decline to about $475 billion, compared with $575 billion in February. This is largely because over $140 billion in shorter-term assets will have matured. Notably, about $120 billion in extended term repos will have expired. As the total value of assets has decreased, so has the level of settlement balances, which are expected to decline from close to $400 billion in early March to roughly $290 billion by the end of April. More recently, the Bank announced that the remaining programs that support market functioning will expire on schedule in April and May. The Bank will also suspend term repo operations, which will further limit growth of the balance sheet.

Because the ongoing recovery continues to require extraordinary monetary stimulus, the Bank has maintained its QE purchases. GoC bonds now make up the largest part of the Bank’s balance sheet at more than 70 percent of total assets, compared with 55 percent in the January Report. Moreover, the Bank’s total ownership of GoC bonds outstanding has increased to about 42 percent. Since March 2020, the Bank has purchased more than 35 percent of total sovereign bonds outstanding, a higher percentage than that of other central banks. Considering the size of Canada’s bond market and of its economy, this means that the Bank has provided a significant amount of stimulus.

Uncertainty around the projection remains unusually high. The projection still depends considerably on how the pandemic evolves, most notably with respect to vaccination rollouts and the spread of COVID-19 variants. 

Several risks identified in previous reports have materialized. In particular, the timeline for broad-based immunity has shortened in the United States, the rate of vaccination has picked up in Canada, and strong Canadian data in the first quarter indicate greater economic resilience to containment measures. As well, the US administration has approved a large fiscal stimulus package. However, a third wave of the virus in Canada has led provincial authorities to reimpose lockdowns. 

The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks. The Bank presents a selection of risks identified as most important for the projected path of inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks considered in the base-case projection. The Bank views these risks as roughly balanced.

Since January, some upside risks associated with the ability to limit the impacts of the virus have been realized and are now embedded in the base-case projection. As a result, pandemic-related risks are now skewed to the downside. The spread of more contagious variants may be more severe than expected, leading authorities to impose stricter and longer-lasting containment measures. In addition, vaccines may be less effective at containing the disease than assumed. It may also take longer to achieve broad-based immunity. A more severe third wave or a more persistent pandemic would lead to additional weakness in output and employment as well as more adverse and persistent effects on confidence. With a more prolonged period of weak economic activity, some risks that have diminished over time, such as labour market 
scarring and corporate financial stress, could re-emerge.

Household savings have increased dramatically since the pandemic began, particularly for higher-income households. This reflects fewer opportunities to spend and increased precautionary savings. Households could spend some of these extra savings on goods and services rather than use them to pay down debt or invest in financial assets. Households could also revert to their pre-pandemic savings rates sooner. In either case, consumption and residential investment would be stronger, contributing to inflationary pressures.

US economic growth could be materially stronger if people spend some of the extra savings built up during the pandemic. Moreover, there could be additional fiscal stimulus, for example, from the proposed American Jobs Plan.

Businesses are facing rising costs, such as higher prices for raw material inputs. Possible labour shortages in specific sectors and occupations could also play a role. In addition, disruptions to business operations brought about by the pandemic may lead firms to adjust 
their supply chains and production processes in ways that could increase costs. In an environment of strong demand, businesses may find that they are better able to raise prices to pass along higher expenses to consumers or to rebuild their margins.

The profile for potential output growth in Canada is stronger than that in the October 2020 Report. However, given the nature of the shock and elevated uncertainty, potential output could be even stronger than assumed. Strong productivity growth in 2020 may indicate that accelerated automation and digitalization have played a more important role than assumed, implying higher trend productivity in recent quarters and over the projection horizon. All else equal, stronger potential output eases inflationary pressures in the economy.

Canadian exports could be weaker than in the base-case projection. The Canadian dollar has reached its highest level since early 2018. The decrease in competitiveness associated with a stronger Canadian dollar could further weigh on Canadian exports. At the same time, Buy American provisions in the United States could mute the benefit to Canadian exporters of strong US demand.
	